2005/DII/e 
 

EUROPEAN QUALIFYING EXAMINATION 2005 

 

PAPER D  -  PART II 

 

 

 

This paper comprises: 

 

 

* 
Client’s letter followed by four (4) questions 
2005/DII/e/1 - 7 

 
 

 
 

* 
Annex: Calendars for 2004 and 2005 with 
2005/DII/e/8 - 9 

 
indication of the days on which at least one 

 
of the EPO filing offices is not open for the 

 
receipt of documents 

 

 

 

 

 

 

45% of the marks available for paper D are awarded for part I, 

55% for part II.


- 1 - 
 

2005/DII/e/1 
…/… 
 

You are a qualified European Patent Attorney and today you received the following letter 

from the Danish Company “Möller Wind Enterprises” (MÖWE), for whom you hold a 

general authorization before the EPO. MÖWE sells windmills and has all its 

development and manufacturing facilities situated in Denmark. 

 

“Dear Madam/Sir, 

 

Earlier today, I had a meeting with Mr. Vinge, an inventor and close friend, who for many 

years has been active in the field of windmill technology. During this meeting, I became 

aware of certain facts and problems, which I believe need immediate attention. 

 

On 29.04.2002, Mr. Vinge filed in Danish a European application, EP1, designating all 

contracting states. Mr. Vinge is applicant and named as inventor. EP1 describes a 

process for manufacturing a windmill wing having a core made of a foamed plastic 

material fully encapsulated by a smooth, hard shell. In this way a lighter and less 

expensive wing is obtainable as compared to prior art wings. The claims are directed to 

both the process and to the wing. The application includes no drawings. A translation 

into English was filed on 25.07.2002. EP1 was published in autumn 2003 and the search 

report cited no relevant documents. Mr. Vinge has been informed by the EPO that 

publication of the grant of the European patent will take place in early April 2005. The 

patent will be granted with the same text as the published application.  

 

Also on 29.04.2002 Mr. Vinge filed another European application, EP2, in Danish and 

designating all contracting states. Again, Mr. Vinge is applicant and is named as 

inventor. EP2 describes and claims a windmill wing with adjustable flaps. By means of 

such flaps a wing can be adjusted to almost any wind condition. Shortly after filing, 

Mr. Vinge realized that the drawings were missing from the application.


- 2 - 
 

2005/DII/e/2 
…/… 
 

Although the claims of EP2 are fully supported by the description and the invention is 

fully understandable based on the seven pages of description alone, he filed the missing 

drawings on 25.05.2002. When asked by the EPO, Mr. Vinge requested that the 

application be re-dated to the date on which the drawings were filed. These drawings 

contain no further technical information. An English translation was filed on 25.07.2002. 

EP2 was published in autumn 2003 and again the search report cited no relevant 

documents. Publication of the grant of the European patent took place on 02.08.2004 

and the patent has been duly validated in all designated states. 

 

In order to enable testing and evaluation, Mr. Vinge informed me fully and in all detail 

about EP1 and EP2 on the 15.05.2002 under a written secrecy agreement. 

 

On 04.07.2002 we celebrated the wedding between Mr. Vinge’s daughter and my son. 

The wedding party took place in my house and garden and some 200 invited guests, 

including important business associates and contacts of Mr. Vinge and myself, 

participated. Much to my surprise and immediate concern, I realized that my wife had 

arranged for a large five tons prototype wing to be placed in the garden for decorative 

purposes, on the day of the wedding. The wing included flaps according to EP2, a 

foamed non-visible core according to EP1 and a plurality of small dimples. Dimples are 

small surface indentations, which are known to be noise reducing. However, I found out 

that when the dimples are placed exclusively in a very specific region near the wing tip 

(as in the prototype), they are surprisingly efficient in reducing noise generation. Later 

the same evening, around 19h00, I managed to put together and file by fax a European 

patent application, EP3, in English language describing and claiming a wing with this 

dimple-arrangement and describing the surprising effect of this arrangement. I am 

applicant and named as inventor. EP3 was published in January 2004 with a search 

report citing no relevant documents. The application is validly pending in the 

examination phase before the EPO and all relevant fees have been paid.


- 3 - 
 

2005/DII/e/3 
…/… 
 

Present at the party was also Mr. Cervantes, who owns our main competitor, the 

Spanish company Don Quichotte Wind Enterprises (DQWE). Mr. Cervantes – who had 

been invited by Mr. Vinge – is known to run his business in a rather aggressive manner.  

Shortly after filing EP3, I discussed with Mr. Cervantes and some other guests from the 

windmill industry my new dimple-based noise-reduction technology.  

 

Later I learned that on the very evening of the wedding, around 23h00, Mr. Cervantes 

filed also by fax a European application, EP4. He is applicant and named as inventor. 

EP4 describes and claims a wing with the very same arrangement of dimples as shown 

by the prototype. EP4 also claims an alternative in the form of a wing with small knobs, 

i.e. protrusions, in the same region near the wing tip. The dimples and the knobs are – 

as is commonly known and as also acknowledged in the description of EP4 – 

equivalents in that they serve substantially the same purpose and obtain substantially 

the same effect. From the description of EP4, it is clear that the inventive contribution is 

seen solely in the new and surprising noise reduction resulting from the specific location 

of the dimples/knobs near the wing tip. EP4 was published in January 2004 with a 

search report citing no relevant documents. The application is validly pending in the 

examination phase before the EPO and all relevant fees have been paid.  

 

In their current sales catalogues, both MÖWE and DQWE show wings with dimples. 

DQWE additionally shows the equivalent knobs. No sales have yet been made by either 

company. However, the technology is believed to be commercially important, since low 

noise windmills can be placed closer to residential areas.


- 4 - 
 

2005/DII/e/4 
…/… 
 

Another possible conflict with DQWE may arise due to a PCT application, PCT1, filed in 

English at the EPO on 15.07.2002 by Mr. Cervantes. He is applicant and named as 

inventor. PCT1 describes a process for manufacturing a windmill wing having a core 

made from foamed, recycled plastics. The foamed core is fully encapsulated by a 

smooth, hard shell making the core as such non-visible. In PCT1, the essence of the 

invention is seen in the use of recycled plastic, which is a very cheap material in 

comparison with virgin plastic. Recycled plastic is easily distinguishable from virgin 

plastic in that it is multi-colored. The claims of PCT1 are directed to the process and to 

the resulting wing. PCT1 was published in January 2004 with a search report citing no 

relevant documents. PCT1 was validly regionalized and is pending in the examination 

phase before the EPO. A corresponding US application was granted in unamended form 

in February 2005. 

 

To me it appears obvious that Mr. Cervantes somehow had gained knowledge of the 

foamed core technology of EP1 and based PCT1 on this knowledge. Mr. Vinge – being 

the only other person apart from me knowing about the interior of the displayed wing - 

vaguely remembers a late-night discussion at the wedding with Mr. Cervantes about the 

wing. However, this was shortly before he had to be brought home by Mrs. Vinge and he 

cannot - or will not - recall the conversation in any detail.  


- 5 - 
 

2005/DII/e/5 
…/… 
 

The use of recycled plastic for the foam core is not really new to me, since I have myself 

considered this obvious choice of material after having learned in May 2002 about the 

foam core structure of EP1. In fact, the wing shown at the wedding also included a foam 

core made from recycled plastic material. At that time, I decided to try to keep the use of 

recycled plastic secret, since the interior of a wing would not be visible. No delivery was 

made before February 2004, when I delivered some wings with a core of foamed, 

recycled plastic to a customer in Germany. However, during installation, an accident 

happened and one of the wings dropped to the ground and broke. With a letter of last 

week, Mr. Cervantes indicated having recently gained knowledge of this incident, and 

thus of our use of recycled plastics for foamed wing cores. Consequently, he has invited 

us to a meeting on 16.04.2005. 

 

We know that DQWE, whose manufacturing facilities all are located in Spain, already 

has made extensive sales of wings according to the technology disclosed in PCT1 in 

Europe and in the USA. 

 

Another aspect of commercial importance is a tender for a large contract for supplying 

wings to a major Californian windmill park where we are competing against DQWE. The 

deadline for submitting offers is 30.04.05. Strong interest has been expressed by the 

Californian company in the recently patented flap technology of EP2 and we are 

convinced that being able to deliver wings with this technology would be vital to securing 

the order. If getting the order, we would of course prefer to make use of the less 

expensive recycled plastic material for the foamed cores. 


- 6 - 
 

2005/DII/e/6 
…/… 
 

During the meeting earlier today, Mr. Vinge informed me that he would like to retire and 

give up all business activities. He offered to assign to me all rights resulting from EP1 for 

the price of EUR 2 million. He also offered EP2 and all national patents resulting from 

EP2 to me for the price of EUR 5 million. Further, he informed me that the same offer 

had been made to DQWE. However, for family reasons, Mr. Vinge has given me two 

days to consider these offers before resuming talks with DQWE. Mr. Vinge also informed 

me that Mr. Cervantes has deposited a binding agreement to purchase any rights that 

MÖWE does not purchase. 

 

To assist me in making my decision, Mr. Vinge handed over a copy of his complete files 

regarding both EP1 and EP2. I noticed that EP1 as originally filed additionally contains 

the seven pages of text identical to the description of EP2, but that the technical content 

of these pages appear nowhere in the application as later published. When asked about 

this, Mr. Vinge explained, that erroneously these pages were omitted when filing the 

English translation of EP1. All relevant fees for EP1 and EP2 have been duly paid. 

 

I consider the flap technology of vital importance and I am thus inclined to accept buying 

EP2 for the stated price. As regards EP1, I consider this technology alone as being less 

important for MÖWE, and as such not worth the asking price of EUR 2 million. In my 

belief, the foamed core technology is only truly interesting in economical terms when 

used in combination with the recycled plastics as disclosed 

by PCT1. 


- 7 - 
 

2005/DII/e/7 
 
 

Please advice me urgently in the above matters, in particular on: 

 

 

1. 
What is the patent situation regarding: 

 

- 
the foamed core technology, and 

- 
the use of recycled plastic material? 

 

What should be my strategy and can my position be improved before the 

upcoming meeting with Mr. Cervantes? 

 

2. 
What is the patent situation regarding the adjustable flap technology and can I 

take any actions to improve my position?  

 

3. 
What is the patent situation regarding the dimples and the equivalent knobs 

and can I take any actions to improve my position? 

 

4. 
If hostile actions against DQWE become unavoidable, I would prefer to remain 

anonymous to not further deteriorate the business climate. What are the 

options ? 

 

 

Yours faithfully, 

 

Möller”


- 1  - 
 

2005/DII/e/8 
.../... 
 

 
Annex 1 

 


- 2  - 
 

2005/DII/e/9 
 
 

 
Annex 2 

 


