 
- 1 - 

 

 

Candidate's answer 

 

Paper DII 

 

 

Dear Sir, 

 

After having studied the information that you provided to me, I would like to offer 

you the following advice in relation to each of your questions. 

 

1) 
Validity of claims 1-5 in Euro-PCT1 and ways to improve them 

 

PCT1 was filed on 1.4.04 claiming priorities from F1, D1 and IT1. PCT1 was 

filed within 12 m of the earliest priority and so priority seems to be validly 

claimed. In principle all requirements to validly enter the regional phase at the 

EPO have been complied with and the application seems to be standing in good 

order. Dealing now with each claim one by one, I can advise as follows: 

 

CLAIM 1 - solar panels having undulating walls 

 

This is disclosed for the first time in F1. Since priority from F1 has been validly 

claimed, this is entitled to 1.10.03 as effective date for the assessment of prior 

art under A54(2) and (3) (A89 EPC). Unfortunately, there seems to be prior art 

prior to this effective date. Under A54(2) EPC, the state of the art comprises 

everything made available to the public by means of a written or oral disclosure. 

According to your information, during the 2002 Tokyo Symposium on Solar 

Panels the disclosure was made of the use of undulating walls to mechanically 

strengthen the panels. Although the printed proceedings for this Symposium 

were not made available until May’04, i.e. after the effective date of claim 1, the 

disclosure during this public conference took place in 2002 and thus amounts to 

prior art citeable against claim 1 under A54(2) EPC.  


 
- 2 - 

 

 

Unless we can provide sound reasons against the printed document being a 

true account of what was said during the conference, it will be assumed that the 

printed document reproduces the oral description (C-IV-5.1, D-V-3.3) and thus 

the disclosure in the 2002 conference will be prior art. Since in that article and 

hence presumably in the conference panels having undulating walls and in 

particular a panel 1 m long with walls having 20 undulations per metre (U/m) 

was disclosed, claim 1 would not be novel (A54(1) EPC).  

Since apart from this single panel, no other disclosure appears to have been 

made, we could try to regain novelty by amending claim 1 to exclude what has 

been disclosed (the panel 1 m x 20 U/m). 

The insertion of such a disclaimer, which is not contained in the application as 

filed, will only be acceptable at the EPO following G1/03, i.e. will not be 

regarded as being against A123(2), if it is used to restore novelty against an 

accidental anticipation under A54(2). Moreover, according to this decision it is 

necessary to remove no more than strictly necessary to restore novelty. Though 

the disclosure in the Japanese symposium deals with solar panels, since it 

deals with an uncompletely related problem to the one we attempt to solve 

(mechanically strengthening panels versus improving thermal efficiency), we 

may well be able to argue that the disclosure of a panel having undulating walls 

with 1 m long and 20 U/m is an accidental disclosure. 

I would therefore propose to amend claim 1 by inserting a disclaimer to exclude 

this panel disclosed in 2002. Such a claim would then be novel. Since the 

technical effect of these panels, i.e. their improved thermal efficiency, cannot at 

all be derived from the prior art, I believe such a claim will be regarded as 

inventive (A56) and hence as patentable – it is clear it has industrial application 

under A57 too. 

I would also suggest, in view of this prior art we have discussed, to insert a 

claim directed to the use of undulating walls in solar panels to improve their 

thermal efficiency. 

Apart from the disclosure in the Tokyo Symposium, there is no other prior art. 

 

 


 
- 3 - 

 

 

CLAIM 2 – solar panels having undulating walls with 5-16 U/m 

 

This invention is disclosed for the first time in the German utility model D1. 

Under G2/98, it cannot be regarded as the same invention as the panels 

disclosed in F1 and thus cannot be entitled to that priority. Under A87(1), priority 

can be claimed from utility models, so the German priority is valid. 

There is no prior art before the effective date of this claim (15.3.04) disclosing 

panels having undulating walls with 5-16 U/m. The Japanese symposium does 

not destroy the novelty of such a claim since it disclosed only one panel having 

20 U/m !the claim is thus novel (there is no other prior art apart from this of an 

earlier date). In addition, this claim can be regarded as inventive since the 

disclosure in Tokyo does not at all anticipate that panels having wavy walls and 

this range of undulations will exhibit improved thermal efficiency, this JP 

disclosure dealing only with the mechanical strength of solar panels. 

Claim 2 thus seems to be valid in the light of the prior art known to us. 

 

CLAIM 3 – Solar panels having undulating walls with 5-16 U/m and < 3 m 

length 

 

Such a combination of features (5-16 U/m) and length < 3 m cannot be 

considered as directly and unambiguously derivable from the disclosure of D1, 

since D1 discloses panels having 5-16 U/m but of any length (even if specific 

examples all have 1 m of length ) !thus the criteria according to G2/98 for 

validly claiming priority for the same invention are not fulfilled. The effective date 

of claim 3 is thus the priority date of IT1, i.e. 22.09.04. 

The Tokyo Symposium does not disclose panels having 5-16 U/m and thus 

does not destroy novelty of such a claim. However, in addition to that, there are 

2 further pieces of prior art to consider: 


 
- 4 - 

 

 

- 
EPB has an earlier filing date (April’04) and was published later (we 

know it is published because the 18-M period for publication expired 

October’05 and moreover you have detected said publication). Assuming 

designation fees are paid for EPB, this will be prior art under 54(3) for the 

assessment of novelty (A54(3)(4), R23a). By the way, this is irrespective 

of the fact that eventually the common designations may be withdrawn in 

EPB. Changes taking effect after the valid publication of the application 

do not affect its status as prior art under A54(3) (see C-IV-6.1a). 

EPB discloses a panel having 10 U/m x 2 m long, i.e. a panel which falls 

within the scope of our claim 3 !claim 3 is not novel over EPB. 

According to G1/03, it would be possible to introduce a disclaimer to 

restore novelty against this A54(3) disclosure (from what you have told 

me I have understood that the structure of the panels in EPB is new and 

different to yours but that there are 2 embodiments of panels such as 

yours disclosed in EPB). 

 

- 
However, in addition to EPB, also D1 is prior art. D1 was published on 

15.09.04 and thus is full prior art under A54(2). Since D1 discloses 

panels having 5-16 U/m albeit of any length – but all examples disclosed 

fall within the scope of claim 3 (all have 1 m of length), claim 3 is not 

novel over the publication of D1. Moreover, D1 is also prior art relevant 

for the assessment of inventive step. Claim 3 thus does not seem to be 

valid. 

 

CLAIM 4 – Solar panels having undulating walls with 15-30 U/m and > 3 m 

length 

 

Such a combination of features is only disclosed for the first time in IT1 and thus 

according to G2/98, it is only entitled to that priority date (cannot be regarded as 

the same invention disclosed in F1 or D1). 

 

 


 
- 5 - 

 

 

The disclosure in JP does not disclose any panel having the features of claim 4 

(20 U/m but 1 m long). 

EPB is prior art under A54(3) for the same reasons discussed above in relation 

to claim 3. EPB discloses a panel having 20 U/m and 4 m long, so falling within 

the scope of claim 4 ! claim 4 is not novel (A54(1)). It will be possible to 

restore novelty by disclaiming this specific combination ! such a disclaimer will 

not be regarded as added matter under A123(2) following G1/03. 

We should also consider the effects of D1, which was published before the 

effective date of claim 4. All embodiments disclosed in D1 correspond to panels 

of 1 m of length, so none falls within the scope of our claim 4. However, claims 

in D1 are not limited to any specific length and disclose thus any panel having 

5-16 U/m. The range claimed in claim 4 clearly overlaps with the range 

disclosed in D1. 

 

 
 

Claim 4 is not novel since it includes the explicitly mentioned end-point of the 

known range from D1. In order to restore novelty, it will not be sufficient to 

exclude the specific novelty destroying value. It is necessary to consider 

whether the skilled person would consider seriously to work in the range of 

overlap; if he would do so, no novelty (T26/85). 

However, we have basis in the disclosure of IT, which according to what you 

told me has all been included in the PCT1, to narrow the claim so as to avoid 

overlap with the range disclosed in D1. 

D1 

5
16

Claim 4 
15 
30


 
- 6 - 

 

 

Since in IT and thus PCT1 we have included embodiments showing the 

technical improvement over both claimed ranges (i.e. the one in claim 3 and 

claim 4) for all integer values of undulations per metre, it would be possible to 

amend claim 4 to direct it to panels having a range of 17-30 U/m + > 3 m length. 

Such a new claim will not be regarded as added matter under A123(2) (see 

T201/83, also T925/98). Such a claim will not overlap with the disclosure in D1 

and thus should be regarded as novel. Moreover, since D1 discloses that in 

order to obtain good results it was necessary that the number of undulations x 

m was between 5 and 16, we will be able to argue that it was unexpected that 

panels having ranges above that range prove to be also effective. So I believe 

we will be able to argue that such a claim is inventive in addition to novel. 

 

CLAIM 5 - Extrusion process 

 

This was disclosed for the first time in F1. Since there seems to be no prior art 

before the effective date of F1 disclosing such a process, I believe such a claim 

is valid, i.e. patentable. 

 

 

 

2) 
Extension of EuroPCT1 to UK/BE 

 

Yes, it is still possible to designate UK and BE in EuroPCT1. 

EuroPCT1 was regionalized on Nov’05 and only DE, FR, IT were designated. I 

assume you mean only the designation fees for these 3 countries were paid (or 

the intention to pay for these 3 countries was indicated in the request for Entry 

into regional phase). According to R107(1)(d), designation fees must be paid 

within 31 months from the earliest priority date if the period under A79(2) (6 m 

from publication of search report) has taken place earlier. Here regional phase 

was entered much well before the 31 M time limit. 31 M term ends: 1.10.03 ! 

[31 m] !1.05.06 closed [R85(1)]! 2.05.06 Tuesday.  

 


 
- 7 - 

 

 

So until that date it is possible to validly pay the designation fees for UK, BE 

and any other country. I would suggest to pay 7 designation fees in total in view 

of Bad’s activities, since that will be deemed to cover designation fees for all 

countries (RFees, 2.3). You can always later on withdraw a designation if you 

so wish. 

 

 

3) 
Ways to postpone national phase entry for PCT1 

 

One way to do this would be to withdraw the claim to priority from F1. According 

to the present situation for PCT1, national phases under A22 PCT must be 

entered within 30 m from the earliest priority, i.e. by 1.04.06 (possibly extended 

to 3.04.06 since 1.04.06 is a Saturday). 

Under R90bis.3(a) PCT it is possible to withdraw a priority claim at any time 

before expiration of 30 M from priority date. So we are on time to do this. 

If there is more than 1 priority, as is the case here, the applicant can exercise 

the right under R90bis.3(a) in respect of one or more priority claims (R90bis.3b). 

Under R90bis.3(d), any time limits computed from original priority and not yet 

expired will be recalculated. If priority is withdrawn now, entry into national 

phases under A22 or A39 will be delayed until 30 M from D1 (15.03.04), i.e. 

until 15.09.06. This will allow you enough time to take decisions on the project, 

which are expected by June. 

 

 


 
- 8 - 

 

 

4) 
Actions against Mr Bad – stop him? 

 

 

As discussed under section 1) above we will be able to obtain in EuroPCT1 

claims directed to: 

 

a) panels with undulating walls (with disclaimer) (subject to convincing the 

EPO that disclosure in JP is accidental) 

b) claim 2   panels with 5-16 U/m 

c) claim 4   panels with 17-30 U/m + >3 m long 

 

If we enter national phases in other countries (US, JP), we will also be able to 

obtain patents there. In the USA, by virtue of the grace period of 1 year, the 

discloure of D1 will not be prior art against claims in PCT1 entitled to the priority 

of IT1 since less than 1 year occurred between the two. We should check JP 

legislation because also a grace period seems to exist there. Moreover, since 

EPB was only filed in Europe, with no equivalent disclosures taking place 

elsewhere, the effects of EPB as prior art as discussed above will be 

constrained only to Europe, since its publication date (18 M from April’04, i.e. 

around October’05) is well after the filing date of PCT1. 

So in the USA Good will be able to obtain broader protection even than in 

Europe, in particular claim 3 and 4 as contained in PCT1. 

Once these patents are granted, Good will be able to stop Bad selling any solar 

panel with undulating walls falling within the scope of their granted claims. 

Since Bad is already offering panels and has in fact started selling at least in UK 

and BE, I would strongly advise you to try to speed up as much as possible 

prosecution of EuroPCT1 under the PACE program (OJ 2001, 459). Under 

A67(1), from the date of publication of an EP application, this already confers 

provisional protection. In certain countries, a published application does not 

confer the full effects provided under A64, only the right to claim for reasonable 

compensation. Certain countries require that claims be published in the 

language of that state for that protection to become effective (A67(3)).  


 
- 9 - 

 

 

Since under A158(1) EPC publication of PCT1 takes the place of publication of 

the EP application, provisional protection under EuroPCT1 is already available. 

We should check national requirements and file translations as required. Copy 

of the application and probably translations should be submitted to the infringer, 

Mr Bad. 

Also in the USA and other countries we may be entitled to provisional 

protection. 

We should monitor the activities of Bad and if he is going to act in any other 

market in addition to Europe I would recommend to enter national phases under 

PCT1 as soon as possible. 

 

 

5) 
Can Bad stop us? 

 

Bad has only EPB as potential right to use against us. So, he can’t do anything 

at all against us outside Europe. 

As to EPB, from the information you had provided me, it would seem as if Bad 

would have obtained information on your panels ilegally via your former 

research manager, Mr Ugly. If that would be the case, it would be possible to try 

to obtain title to EPB since an EP patent shall belong to the inventor or 

successor in title and Mr Bad maybe is not the inventor. 

In principle, proceedings could be started against him claiming entitlement to his 

alleged invention and thereafter, once a final favourable decision was obtained, 

claim the right to EPB under A61. However, from what you have told me, it 

seems it may be extremely difficult to prove such an allegation, so it seems we 

do not have much chances here. 

So, assuming he retains EPB, he may be able to obtain a patent for whatever 

new is disclosed in his application. I am not sure to have fully understood the 

contents of EPB from your comments. You say it claims a new structure for 

superposed panels. It seems to me that this is different to your structure in your 

panels. If this is so, you should not concern much about his patent.  

 


 
- 10 - 

 

 

As long as your panels do not fall within the scope of their granted claims, Bad 

will not be able to stop you. It is irrelevant if there is disclosure of panels such 

as yours in the description, that has only relevance with regard to the effects of 

EPB as prior art against you. In such a case, at the most he could try to obtain 

claims directed to the only two specific embodiments of panels with undulating 

walls disclosed, 10 U/m x 2 m and 20 U/m x 4 m. Those have as effective date 

April’04. Though specifically these two panels have not been previously 

disclosed in any prior art – the relevant prior art for them is the Tokyo 

proceedings under A 54(2) and your EuroPCT1 under A54(3) for all commonly 

designated states – it is very unprobable that he can get claims granted on 

them since no effect is explained, so no technical teaching different over the 

disclosure in Tokyo 2002. If he could get such claims, the effect would be that 

while his patent would be dependent on yours since it has a later effective date, 

you would not be able to sell such two panels without Mr Bad’s permission. Of 

course, as stated under 4), he will not be able to sell without your permission. 

So, in view of the fact that your EuroPCT1 is entitled at least to F1 and D1 

dates, which are earlier than EPB date, it is hardly possible that EPB can get 

any blocking claims. 

As to his offer to withdraw embodiments, this does not make much sense. 

Under A54(3), as stated above, his application is prior art as from its valid 

publication, whatever happens later to his application. So even if he would 

delete those embodiments now, that would not change the effect of EPB as 

prior art under A54(3) (see my discussion earlier on). 

Your position seems to be pretty good, so no need to discuss any agreement 

with him. 

Only if contrary to my understanding explained above, his application EPB 

would indeed contain claims that would potentially cover your intended acts, i.e. 

the panels you wish to manufacture, should we then consider starting 

discussions with him. In any event, because you have an earlier effective date 

in EuroPCT1, you will be able to obtain broader protection (your application 

would moreover be prior art under A54(3) against him for all validly common 

designated states) and so will always be in a better position for negotiating. 


