2007/DII/e

EUROPEAN QUALIFYING EXAMINATION 2007

PAPER D  - PART II

This paper comprises:

*
Client’s letter followed by five (5) questions
2007/DII/e/1 - 6

*
Annex: Calendars for 2006 and 2007 with
2007/DII/e/7 - 8

indication of the days on which at least one

of the EPO filing offices is not open for the

receipt of documents

40% of the marks available for paper D are awarded for part I,

60% for part II.


- 1 -

2007/DII/e/1

You are a professional representative and today, 6 March 2007, you receive the 

following letter from a new client, Caledonian Sportswear Ltd. 

We are a UK based company manufacturing textiles and sportswear and control a small 

group of financially connected but legally independent companies that includes 

company Sean Insulation Ltd, a manufacturer of insulating panels for the automotive 

and aircraft industries. Please advise us on the following pending matters to be dealt 

with in the near future.

1. Two years ago, while searching for new fibres for warm sportswear we developed a 

new polymer composition (composition B + A). This composition is a mix of known 

polymers B and A and with it we produced thick and rigid foamed sheets having very 

good insulation properties. Since these foamed sheets were relevant to the technology 

of our subsidiary Sean Insulation Ltd, we transferred the technology and all relevant 

rights to them. On 16 September 2005 they filed a UK application (UK-1) disclosing and 

claiming composition B + A and insulating rigid foamed sheets made of composition 

B + A.

Early last year we developed a new way of processing polymer composition B + A. With 

this process, thin and flexible foamed sheets can be obtained from composition B + A. 

Such thin sheets are suitable for scuba-diving suits and for swimming and surf 

costumes and are superior to known thick materials.


- 2 -

2007/DII/e/2

On 18 March 2006 we filed an EP application (EP-1) as first filing. EP-1 discloses and 

claims the polymer composition B + A, the new foaming process of manufacturing the 

thin sheets and the thin sheets thus obtained. The description also discloses examples 

of scuba diving suits and swimming and surf costumes made of foamed composition 

B + A, as well as one example of a suit made of a new sheet of foamed polymer B 

alone. In addition, one comparative example of a known suit made of foamed polymer A 

is given.

We usually pay the filing and search fees on the very last day but in the case of EP-1 

we forgot to pay in time and in May 2006 we received a communication from the EPO 

pointing out that the fees could still be paid with a surcharge. 

Rather than paying the surcharge, we did not respond and on 19 June 2006 we filed 

another EP Application (EP-2) claiming priority of UK-1. All the fees for EP-2 were paid. 

EP-2 has identical claims to EP-1, the description of EP-2 corresponds to the 

description of EP-1 with the exception that we removed the example and all references 

to polymer B alone and we added examples of thin foamed sheets obtained from 

compositions of polymer B with other known foamable polymers C, D and E. Polymers 

C,D and E are known to be similar to polymer A and are part of a class of polymers 

(class Z) which comprises, among others, polymers A, C, D and E.

In the meantime we have found that foamed sheets made only of polymer B could be 

thin enough to become commercially very interesting.


- 3 -

2007/DII/e/3

We have received the search report for EP-2 from the EPO. The search report cited just 

one prior document:

- US-Spectre published in May 2005 discloses polymer A and its use for making 

foamed sheets for scuba diving; these sheets are as thick as the traditional, known 

sheets.

We recently found that the June 2006 issue of "American Journal of Surf and Scuba" 

(AJSS) contains a scientific article that discusses patent US-Spectre. The article 

suggests using polymer B alone or in combination with A or other similar polymers such 

as polymers C and D, to reduce the thickness of foamed sheets for scuba-diving suits 

and surf costumes. The date printed on this publication is 16 June 2006. 

We also developed a new extrusion process for transforming the polymer compositions 

of polymer B + polymers of class Z (such as A or C, D, E) into fibres and yarns with 

which textiles are produced. Before our new process, only foams could be obtained 

from the compositions B + polymers of class Z. 

The textiles have the same thermal insulation properties as the foamed sheets obtained 

from the same polymer compositions B + polymers of class Z. Woven textiles are very 

good for scuba-diving suits and for surf costumes, while non-woven are very good as 

insulating liners for rigid insulating panels.

On 7 July 2006 we filed patent application EP-3 (no priority was claimed), that discloses 

and claims the extrusion process, the polymer compositions B + polymers of class Z 

and textiles obtainable therefrom, i.e. woven and non-woven textiles.

Composition B + A, the extrusion process for producing yarns and fibres made of  it and 

the textiles were disclosed at a press release in August 2006. 


- 4 -

2007/DII/e/4

The new compositions of polymer B + polymers of class Z , the fibres, the textiles and 

the thin foamed sheets of polymer B alone and of polymer B + polymers of class Z will 

be produced in a new factory that we are building in Australia. A world-wide protection 

for all the features disclosed in our applications is essential for our company to protect 

the huge investments we made in research. We intend to sell Sean Insulation Ltd and 

all its assets, to finance the construction of the Australian factory. Sean Insulation’s 

patent portfolio comprises only application UK-1 and an international application 

Sean PCT, which was filed by them on 2 September 2006, claims priority of UK-1 and 

has the same description and claims as UK-1.

2. Our former employee Ms Moneypenny was involved in the study of how to process 

the new polymer composition polymer B + polymers of class Z into textiles. During this 

work Ms Moneypenny devised the extrusion process that is claimed in EP-3. She also 

devised a new weaving process (process ALFA) specially designed for and requiring 

the yarns of polymeric composition B + A. Process ALFA reduces the time required for 

obtaining a square meter of woven fabric by 25%. Because at that time we were not 

interested in this weaving process we did not file an application. Ms Moneypenny  

resigned from our company in May 2006 to start her own business. 

To our astonishment, we have recently received a warning letter from our competitors 

Goldfinger Ltd,  an Irish Company, informing us of their European patent application 

EP-Gold. A copy of the EP-Gold filing documents was enclosed with the letter. EP-Gold 

was filed as a first application on 13 July 2006  and it claims weaving process ALFA. 

Application EP-Gold also claims the woven fabric. 

No mention is made of the extrusion process or of the yarns required for the weaving 

process.


- 5 -

2007/DII/e/5

In their letter, Goldfinger Ltd warn us against using weaving process ALFA and against 

selling any woven fabric obtained from composition B + A unless we pay them huge 

royalties.

We immediately contacted Ms Moneypenny who informed us, Caledonian Sportswear 

Ltd, of the following facts:

-
She orally disclosed, under a written secrecy agreement, process ALFA to 

Goldfinger Ltd in June 2006. She told them that it is her invention and, by contract 

between her and us, we are the rightful owner of this invention. She further told 

Goldfinger Ltd that, in her view, we were not interested in weaving process ALFA. 

-
She did not disclose to Goldfinger the process of making fibres.

-
On 20 December 2006 she filed a national application (UK-Penny). This 

application refers to the press release, discloses process ALFA, and discloses and 

claims an improvement of process ALFA, called weaving process BETA. This 

improvement consists of an additional feature Y by which all kinds of yarns, i.e. 

also yarns obtained from B + any of the polymers of class Z, can be treated at the 

same high speed by the weaving process BETA. Claim 1 of UK-Penny 

corresponds to claim 1 of EP-Gold plus the additional feature Y.

Ms Moneypenny proposed closely cooperating with Caledonian to develop, protect and 

exploit new universal weaving process BETA. 

We are very interested in the new process of Ms Moneypenny and are willing to resume 

cooperation with her.

On the basis of Ms Moneypenny's information we replied to the warning letter of 

Goldfinger telling them that we are the owners of any right to process ALFA. Goldfinger 

answered that they had devised and developed process ALFA independently, on the 

basis of the information given in the above-mentioned article in AJSS.


- 6 -

2007/DII/e/6

The woven textiles are now intensively advertised and sales have been constantly 

growing since the first sale in January 2007. Therefore we want to avoid any problem in 

commercializing our woven textiles and the high speed weaving process BETA, as well 

as in providing other companies with yarns of any of our polymer compositions.

Please give us your analysis of the following points:

1.
the scope and legal situation of our patent applications EP-1, EP-2, EP-3 and 

Sean - PCT;

2.
the actions to be taken in order to obtain world-wide protection for our products 

and processes and to keep costs as low as possible over the coming year, while at 

the same time maximizing the value of the insulating panels patent portfolio of 

Sean Insulation Ltd in view of the future sale of this company;

3.
the scope and legal situation of EP-Gold and UK-Penny;

4.
the effects that EP-Gold may have on our business; and

5.
ways of resolving the conflict with Goldfinger concerning the process for weaving 

textiles. For financial reasons, we do not want to start litigation for ownership of

EP - Gold.


- 1 -

2007/DII/e/7

Annex 1


- 2 -

2007/DII/e/8

Annex 2


