Examiners' Report Paper D 2011 - Part II 
 
 
It is well-established that Part II of Paper D requires the candidates to first analyze a 
situation involving various inventions, applications and patents and based on this analysis 
to provide advice to a client on actions to take in the form of answers to specific questions. 
 
The main issues the candidates were expected to recognise in this year's paper were: 
 
-  The claims of PCT-Ax were not entitled to the priority of DE-Ax. DE-Ax did not disclose 
the specific lubricating composition comprising a combination of a silicon oil and a 
viscosity improver, present in all claims of PCT-Ax. Instead, it disclosed that the 
lubricating composition comprised an oil to be selected from a long list of oils and at 
least one additive to be also chosen from a list of additives. The lubricant composition in 
PCT-Ax was, thus, a selection from two lists of a certain length and could not be 
considered to have been disclosed in DE-Ax. 
 
 - The priority claim from JP-PAN1 in EP-PAN1 was valid because JP-PAN1 and JP-PAN2 
were filed by different applicants (Pankutaya Nederland BV and Pankutaya Japan KK 
respectively). Hence, despite the fact that JP-PAN2 related to the same invention and 
was filed before JP- PAN1, the latter was still the first application for Pankutaya 
Nederland BV which was the applicant of EP-PAN1. 
 
-  The disclaimer in EP-Ax was invalid. The disclaimer was an undisclosed disclaimer 
because there was no distinction in EP-Ax between mechanical and hydraulic brakes. It 
did not fulfil the requirements set in G01/03 for several reasons: it disclaimed more than 
necessary to restore novelty (as brake systems with hydraulic disc brakes were not 
disclosed in EP-PAN2); it was not necessary to restore novelty because the 
embodiment in EP-PAN2 was not an enabling disclosure and could not be part of the 
state of the art; it disclaimed a non-working embodiment, so it was also relevant for 
sufficiency of disclosure. 
 
 
Candidates are encouraged to verify their calculations of time limits in order to avoid 
arriving at wrong dates and at a distorted view of the current situation. 
 
Regarding the specific questions: 
 
 
Question 1 
 
Most of the candidates realised that PCT-Ax was filed within the priority year of DE-Ax 
since the time limit was extended due to an official holiday of the EPO. Some candidates 
recognised that the claims of PCT-Ax were not entitled to the priority of DE-Ax and saw the 
need to add a priority claim of USP-Ax in view of the disclosure to the standardisation 
committee. 
 
It was generally well-recognised that it was still possible to add a priority claim from  
USP-Ax since the four months from the filing date of PCT-Ax had not yet expired, although 
some candidates referred to the 16 months from priority date starting - wrongly - from the 
priority to be added (USP-Ax) and not from the earlier priority date (DE-Ax). 

- 1 -


 
A majority of candidates recognised that both JP-PAN1 and JP-PAN2 were prior art 
against PCT-Ax, regardless of its effective date, and destroyed the novelty of its first three 
claims (claim 3 only by JP-PAN2). The lubricating composition in the claims of PCT-Ax 
was disclosed in both JP-PAN1 and JP-PAN2 since it involved a one fold selection from a 
short list. 
 
Most of the candidates recognised that claim 4, directed to the cross-shaped cross-section, 
was novel and inventive and based their justification on the radical departure from the prior 
art and/or the technical advantages.  
 
Regarding the payment of the additional search fee for claim 4, most of the candidates 
were familiar with the regulations concerning deposit accounts, although some candidates 
missed the fact that the administrative fee of 30% surcharge was not paid and there was 
no way to have a valid payment of the search fee. More than a few candidates used EPC 
provisions for calculating time limits instead of those of the PCT. For instance, the 10-day 
rule under the EPC should not have been applied since PCT-Ax was still in the 
international phase.  
 
On the other hand, many candidates correctly proposed the filing of a divisional application 
related to the subject matter of claim 4 upon entry of PCT-Ax into the European regional 
phase.  
 
 
Question 2 
 
Many candidates recognised the validity of the priority claim from JP-PAN1 in EP-PAN1 
and drew the correct conclusions about what patent protection Pankutaya could obtain, 
namely the axle unit with the special seal S. Most of the candidates also recognised that 
Axbruch - despite a patent they could get for cross-shaped cross-section - would still not 
be free to use it because of Pankutaya's EP-PAN1. 
 
Most of the candidates spotted the importance of the patent Axbruch could get on the 
cross-shaped cross section of the axle as it was accepted to be the standard. 
 
 
Question 3 
 
Those candidates who recognised the invalidity of the disclaimer also saw the need to 
appeal in order to remove it. However, many candidates answered that Axbruch should 
appeal without giving full reasoning. For instance, some candidates only cited the case law 
stating that a proprietor being a party as of right in appeal proceedings was limited to 
defending the patent as amended by the opposition division.  
 
 
Question 4 
 
Some candidates appreciated that the only type of brakes disclosed in the application 
documents of EP-Ax was the disc brakes and the claim the client could obtain was to a 
bicycle brake system with the brake lever and disc brakes. 
 

- 2 -


Possible solution - Paper D 2011 - Part II 
 
 
Answer to question 1: 
 
For which aspects of our development can we obtain patent protection in Europe, 
and how? 
 
PCT-Ax is Axbruch's only pending patent application that could conceivably lead to 
protection in Europe, as DE-Ax is no longer pending.   
The priority period commencing with the filing of USP-Ax expired on 1 February 2011.  
Although the time window for filing a new European or international patent application in 
combination with a request for re-establishment of rights into the priority period or 
restoration of the priority right respectively is still open, there are no grounds on which 
such a request could be based. 
PCT-Ax claims priority of DE-Ax. DE-Ax has a filing date of 30 October 2009. PCT-Ax was 
filed in time to claim priority of DE-Ax, because 30 October 2010 is a Saturday and 1 
November 2010 is All Saints ’ Day, which is a day on which the EPO (Munich) as the 
Receiving Office was closed.  Axbruch GmbH was applicant for DE-Ax, and is applicant for 
PCT-Ax for all states except for the U.S.  From a formal point of view, the requirements for 
a valid priority claim are met.  
DE-Ax discloses an axle unit with the special seal S and the two axle variants.  It also 
discloses that the axle unit contains a lubricating composition of which the oil can be 
chosen from one long list of suitable oils and an additive from another list of suitable 
additives. However, all claims of PCT-Ax include the feature “silicon oil and a viscosity 
improver”.  This is a selection from the two lists, namely the list of oils and the list of 
additives, given in DE-Ax.  Therefore, DE-Ax does not disclose the invention claimed in 
PCT-Ax, and the claims of PCT-Ax are not entitled to the priority date of DE-Ax.  As things 
stand, the effective date of all claims is the filing date of PCT-Ax (2 November 2010). 
The submission of the complete description of the two axle unit variants to the 
standardisation committee amounts to a public disclosure.  Because the disclosure to the 
standardisation committee discloses all the subject-matter of PCT-Ax, it is essential that 
the claims of PCT-Ax have an effective date prior to 2 February 2010. 
A claim to priority of USP-Ax in PCT-Ax should be added.  At the filing date of PCT-Ax, 
USP-Ax stood in the name of Axbruch GmbH, following an assignment from the inventors.  
Therefore, the applicants for USP-Ax and PCT-Ax were the same at the filing date of  
PCT-Ax.  A claim to priority may be added until 16 months from the earliest priority date, 
but in any case within 4 months from the filing date of PCT-Ax.  The 16-months period 
expired on 28 February 2011.  However, the 4-months period expires on 2 March 2011.  
Therefore, a request to add a claim to priority of USP-Ax should be filed tomorrow at the 
latest.  This request can be filed with the IB or with the EPO as Receiving Office.  USP-Ax 
is Axbruch's first application to disclose in detail the two axle units that Axbruch has 
developed in combination with the lubricant composition.  The subject-matter of all claims 
of PCT-Ax is therefore disclosed in USP-Ax, so that all claims of PCT-Ax would be entitled 
to the date of filing of USP-Ax and would have 1 February 2010 as their effective date. 
JPU-PAN1 and JPU-PAN2 were published before the effective date of all the claims of 
PCT-Ax.  EP-PAN1 is prior art under Art. 54(3) EPC.  Each of JPU-PAN1, JPU-PAN2 and 
EP-PAN1 discloses an axle unit with a seal corresponding to the seal S developed by 
Axbruch and with an axle decreasing in diameter towards each end.  JPU-PAN1,  
JPU-PAN2 and EP-PAN1 additionally describe that the lubricant composition is a silicon oil 
in combination with an additive that may be a viscosity index improver, an emulsifier or an 

- 3 -


anti-foaming agent.  The combination of a silicon oil with a viscosity index improver is a 
one-fold selection from a single list, so that this combination is disclosed in each of  
JPU-PAN1, JPU-PAN2 and EP-PAN1. 
It follows that the subject-matter of claims 1 and 2 of PCT-Ax is not new. 
The axle ends described in JPU-PAN1 and EP-PAN1 are triangular in cross-section, so 
that the subject-matter of claims 3 and 4 of PCT-Ax is not disclosed in JPU-PAN1 or  
EP-PAN1.  However, JPU-PAN2 further discloses that the axle has a pentagonal cross-
section at each end.  Therefore, JPU-PAN2 discloses the subject-matter of claim 3 of 
PCT-Ax, but not the cross-shaped axle ends that are the subject of claim 4.    
The cross-shaped axle ends are new.  They are also seen as a radical departure from the 
normal square shape and have technical advantages over the pentagonal and triangular 
ones.  These are indications that the subject-matter of claim 4 of PCT-Ax is inventive. 
The EPO has issued an invitation to pay an additional search fee within one month of 
23 January 2011.  This time period expired on 23 February 2011, so that the fee cannot 
now be validly paid.  Because the shortfall in the deposit account was made up on 
24 February 2011, the deemed date of payment is 24 February 2011, which is outside the 
time period set.   
The shortfall in the deposit account was notified by fax on 26 January 2011.  For the 
payment to have been considered made on time, the account should have been 
replenished and an additional surcharge of 30 % paid.  The time period for doing so 
expired on 26 February 2011, carried over to 28 February 2011.  The account was 
replenished in due time.  However, the surcharge was not paid in due time, because no 
debit order to this effect was filed.  Therefore, the International Search Report will not 
cover the subject-matter of claim 4.   
There are no remedies available in the international phase for missing the time period for 
payment of the additional search fee. 
Because the EPO was the International Searching Authority, no supplementary search will 
be performed on entry into the regional phase before the EPO.  The EPO will request that 
the applicant limit the application to one invention covered by the International Search 
Report, so that an amendment to make claim 4 an independent claim will not be possible.  
Axbruch will have to enter the regional phase and then file a divisional patent application 
directed to the subject-matter of claim 4. 
Axbruch could possibly file another divisional patent application with a second non-medical 
use claim to the use of a combination of a silicon oil and a viscosity index improver to 
prolong the lifespan of an axle unit including a seal S. 
 
 
Answer to question 2: 
 
Please analyse whether Pankutaya could obtain valid patent protection that would 
pose a threat to our European activities.  
 
EP-PAN1 claims an axle unit with a seal corresponding to Axbruch's seal S.  EP-PAN1 
claims priority of JPU-PAN1, which has a filing date of 15 July 2009.  There are no earlier 
disclosures, because JPU-PAN2 was published later.  JPU-PAN2 has an earlier filing date 
than JPU-PAN1, however.  JPU-PAN2 also discloses an axle unit with a seal 
corresponding to Axbruch's seal S.  However, JPU-PAN1 and JPU-PAN2 have different 
applicants.  Therefore, JPU-PAN1 is a first application.  Because EP-PAN1 was filed by 
reference to JPU-PAN1, there is identity of contents.  EP-PAN1 was filed 1 July 2010, 
therefore within 12 months of the filing date of JPU-PAN1.  It follows that the priority claim 

- 4 -


of EP-PAN1 is valid.  Therefore, there is no benefit in filing JPU-PAN2 as third party 
observations. 
 
Pankutaya can obtain a valid European patent to an axle unit with a seal corresponding to 
the seal S.  Such a patent would cover the axle unit that Axbruch GmbH intends to 
manufacture, so that they would infringe.  Axbruch GmbH will need to take a licence from 
Pankutaya. 
 
The European patent directed to the subject-matter of claim 4 of PCT-Ax that Axbruch 
GmbH could obtain would be a dependent patent relative to EP-PAN1.  Axbruch's patent 
is very likely to become essential to the new standard, so that Pankutaya would be 
interested in negotiating a cross-licence agreement.   
 
EP-PAN1 is a pending European patent application.  It is not a divisional of an earlier 
European patent application.  There are no indications that examination has been 
requested, let alone that a first communication from the Examination Division been issued.  
Therefore, Pankutaya could still file a European divisional patent application based on  
EP-PAN1.   
 
 
Answer to question 3: 
 
Should we appeal?  
 
Axbruch GmbH is entitled to appeal, because it is adversely affected by the decision of the 
Opposition Division (i.e. the decision not to allow the main request).  
 
The ground of insufficiency introduced by Pankutaya is a fresh ground of opposition.  It will 
not be considered if Axbruch were to object to its introduction.  Since the statement of 
grounds of appeal must contain a party's complete case, dismissal of the only ground of 
appeal might well be the end of the appeal.  However, this would not be in Axbruch's 
interests.  
 
EP-Ax only discloses disc brakes. It does not make a distinction between mechanical and 
hydraulic brakes.  Therefore, the disclaimer added in the opposition proceedings was an 
undisclosed disclaimer in the sense of G 1/03. 
 
The disclaimer is invalid for any one of the following reasons: 
1)  It arguably disclaims more than is necessary to restore novelty over EP-PAN2, 
because it disclaims also all bicycle brake systems with hydraulic disc brakes, but such a 
bicycle brake system is not disclosed in EP-PAN2. 
2)  It is not necessary to restore novelty, because the disclosure of EP-PAN2 is not an 
enabling disclosure. 
3)  It has become relevant to the issue of sufficiency of disclosure, because it disclaims a 
bicycle brake system that does not work.   
 
To obtain a valid patent, the disclaimer should be removed. 
 
If Axbruch do not file an appeal, then they would have to defend the patent as maintained 
in opposition proceedings.  As a party as of right, they could then not remove the 

- 5 -


disclaimer, because that would broaden the scope of protection, i.e. contravene the 
principle of no Reformatio in Peius (G 4/93).  It follows that Axbruch must appeal. 
 
Since the appeal has suspensive effect, the opposition proceedings are still pending.  For 
completeness, it is noted that Axbruch cannot initiate limitation proceedings to limit the 
granted patent by an amendment that does not include the disclaimer.  They cannot wait 
until the appeal is disposed of either, because then the patent they would apply to limit 
would include the disclaimer, and its removal would not be a limitation, but an extension. 
 
 
Answer to question 4: 
 
Discuss what subject-matter we could validly claim to obtain the broadest scope of 
protection possible. 
 
If Axbruch appeal, they cannot revert to the independent claim of the patent as granted, 
which was directed to the brake lever.  This claim lacks novelty, because there is sufficient 
information in EP-PAN2 to make the brake lever.  EP-PAN2 merely does not provide 
sufficient information to make a functioning bicycle brake system. 
 
A claim to a bicycle brake system comprising the brake lever would encompass a limited 
number of alternative brake systems (four) of which one is not enabled, namely the bicycle 
brake system with the newly developed brake lever and a hydraulic rim brake.  It is 
therefore arguable that a claim to a bicycle brake system comprising the brake lever would 
not be enabled.   
 
The broadest protection Axbruch could certainly get would be in the form of an 
independent claim to a bicycle brake system with the brake lever and disc brakes.  Also 
possible in principle would be a claim to a set of parts for use in assembling a bicycle 
brake system, comprising the brake lever and disc brakes.   
 

- 6 -


29 June 2011

Examination Committee III agrees on .......... marks and recommends the 
following grade to the Examination Board:

COMPENSABLE FAIL 
(45-49)
FAIL 
(0-44)
PASS 
(50-100)

Candidate No.

Paper D 2011 - Marking Sheet

EXAMINATION COMMITTEE III

Chairman of Examination Committee III

__________________________________________

Maximum 
possible

Marker
Marker

Marks awarded

Question 1

Question 2

Question 3

Question 4

Question 5

Question 6

Question 7

Question 8

4

6

5

5

3

6

4

7

Question 1

Question 2

Question 3

Question 4

35

11

10

4

Total Part I + II
100

Part I

Part II


