- 1 - 

Examiners' Report Paper D 2012 - Part II 

The DII paper requires candidates to analyse a situation concerning various 
existing patent rights and suggest specific actions that are usually to be 
carried out within a time limit. Care should be taken to correctly calculate the 
time limits. 
 
This year the main aspects of the paper were: 
 
- the priority claim for claim 1 of EP-2 was invalid since it was directed to a 
generalisation not directly and unambiguously derivable from EP-1; 
 
- claim 2 of EP-2, claiming validly the priority from EP-1, was novelty 
destroying for claim 1 of EP-WG; 
 
- the interview with the examiner set for the following day indicated that the 
international preliminary examination report (IPER) of PCT-1 had not been 
issued yet despite the expiration of the 31 month time limit; consequently 
the submissions of Membrain were not yet publicly available so that a new 
application based on them could still be filed; 
 
- the time limit for PCT-1 to enter the European regional phase had been 
missed but it was still possible to enter through the further processing 
procedure; 
 
- it was possible to attack EP-CART for lack of inventive step by having 
Dialab appeal the decision of the opposition division and by Membrain 
intervening in the pending opposition-appeal proceedings; 
 
- the encyclopaedia could be used as proof of common general knowledge 
despite the fact that it was published on the filing date of EP-CART and 
was not itself part of the state of the art. 
 
Regarding the specific questions: 
 

1Question 1 

Most candidates realised that PCT-1 and EP-2 fulfilled the formal 
requirements for claiming priority from EP-1: identity of applicant and filing 
within the priority period. They also realised that claim 1 of EP-2 could not 
benefit from the priority of EP-1 since it was not directed to the same invention 
as EP-1. The consequence that this claim was lacking novelty over the 
website posting by Watergate was also recognised by many candidates. 
 
A lot of candidates correctly stated that claim 2 of EP-2 enjoyed the priority of 
EP-1 and was novelty destroying for claim 1 of EP-WG. 
 


- 2 - 

Most of the candidates stated that the normal time limit for PCT-1 to enter the 
European regional phase had expired. Not all of them, however, commented 
on the missed time limit to enter the US national phase. 
 
Few candidates recognised that the objection for missing essential features in 
the claim of PCT-1 would be very likely dropped. 
 

2Question 2 

A lot of candidates suggested that Membrain should file a new application 
related to the subject matter described in the reply submitted for PCT-1.  
 
Not all of those were familiar with the fact that the international preliminary 
examination (IPE) is confidential until the issue of the IPER and the 
submissions made by Membrain were not immediately made available to the 
public. Fewer candidates reached the conclusion that, since Membrain had an 
interview with the examiner set for the following day, the IPE had not finished 
yet and the file had not been made accessible to the public by the EPO. 
Those candidates suggested that the new application should ideally be filed at 
the latest on the day of the interview since the IPER could be issued any 
moment thereafter. 
 
Few candidates elaborated on the eventual geographic coverage and the 
possible claims of the new application. 
 

3Question 3 

Most of the candidates recognised that it was still possible to enter the 
European regional phase of PCT-1 by requesting further processing. Very few 
candidates, however, stated that this can be done even before the notification 
of loss rights is issued by the EPO. 
 
Very few candidates suggested that Membrain should file third party 
observations /opposition based on Euro-PCT 1 and/or EP-2 against EP WG in 
order to invalidate its first claim. 
 
Many candidates provided an analysis of what scope of protection Membrain 
and Watergate would obtain after the suggested actions were carried out. Not 
all of them, however, drew conclusions about how the resulting rights could be 
used by Membrain and Watergate to prevent each other from exploiting their 
inventions. Some candidates suggested reasonable licensing agreements. 
 

4Question 4 

Most of the candidates recognised that the correct way to respond to the 
infringement proceedings instituted against Membrain was to have Dialab 
appeal the decision of the opposition division so as to give to Membrain the 
opportunity to intervene as assumed infringer. With respect to filing the 
appeal, most of the candidates stated the required actions. Regarding the 
intervention procedure, however, insufficient details were given by most of the 
candidates. 


- 3 - 

Many candidates realised that the encyclopaedia was not part of the state of 
the art, but could be used as proof of common general knowledge. They 
recognised that the only reasonable attack against EP-CART was based on 
lack of inventive step. Not all of those candidates, however, provided an 
argumentation against EP-CART based on the combination of D1 with this 
common general knowledge. 
 
Few candidates recognised that lack of inventive step was a fresh ground of 
opposition and that if Dialab raised it, it would only be admitted with the 
consent of Watergate. Raised by Membrain as intervener, it would be 
admitted without this restriction. 


- 4 - 

Possible solution - Paper D 2012 - Part II 

5Answer to question 1 

EP-1 was validly filed as no claims are needed for accordance of a filing date. 
EP-1 is the first filing for a membrane module comprising the special nozzle N 
and the combination of ceramic membranes C and the nozzle made of 
stainless steel. 
 
EP-2 was filed within the priority period, 31.7.2010 extended to 2.08.2010. 
Priority can be claimed from EP-1 as the subsequent fate of the application is 
irrelevant. The priority is not valid for claim 1 in EP-2 as it is directed to a 
generalisation not derivable from EP-1, i.e. not to the same invention. The 
handbook is prior art under Art. 54(2) EPC for claim 1 of EP-2. The website 
posting is prior art under Art. 54(2) EPC for claim 1 of EP-2. The disclosure on 
the website destroys novelty of the subject-matter of claim 1 of EP-2. 
 
The priority is valid for claim 2 of EP-2 as it is directed to the specific 
combination of ceramic membranes and the nozzle made of stainless steel 
disclosed in EP-1. Claim 2 of EP-2 is novel and inventive.  
 
PCT-1 validly claims priority from EP-1 as it was filed within the priority period 
and the claim of PCT-1 is unambiguously and directly derivable from the 
general part of EP-1. The subject-matter of the sole claim of PCT-1 is novel 
and inventive. 
 
US-WG is the first filing for a module with nozzle N and a bundle of fibres 
made of polymer P and there is no relevant prior art. EP-WG validly claims 
priority as it was filed within the priority period, i.e. 30.4.2011 extended to 
2.5.2011, and directed to the same subject-matter as US-WG due to filing by 
reference. As EP-WG was published and its priority is valid, EP-WG is 54(3) 
EPC prior art for claim 1 of EP-2. The subject-matter of claim 2 of EP-2 is 
54(3) EPC prior art against the subject-matter of claim 1 of EP-WG because 
claim 2 of EP-2 validly claims priority from EP-1. The subject-matter of claim 1 
of EP-WG is not novel in view of claim 2 of EP-2. 
 
The demand for PCT-1 was validly filed as the time limit is the transmittal of 
ISR plus 3 months.  
 
There is sufficient evidence before the examiner that a module also works 
with other materials than ceramic fibres; the objection as to the missing 
essential feature is likely to be dropped resulting in a positive IPER. 
 
The time limit of 30 months for entering the US national phase with PCT-1 has 
lapsed.  


- 5 - 

6Answer to question 2 

The evidence submitted to the EPO and concerning the revolutionary 
membranes comprising the coating is NOT yet made available to the public 
due to the confidential nature of the IPE. The EPO allows access to the IPE 
files once IPER has been established. IPER has not been established as the 
interview with the examiner has not been held yet.  
 
File a new application directed to the revolutionary membranes at the latest 
tomorrow, i.e. the date of the interview. The new application should be (a) a 
PCT application, (b) a priority filing for a subsequent PCT application in order 
to cover the relevant markets including the emerging countries or (c) national 
filings for those countries. This time, ensure you seek protection in the US in 
order to obtain patent rights that would prevent Watergate from manufacturing 
in the US. The claims in the new application(s) should be directed to a 
membrane fibre made of polymer P and comprising the coating K. Include 
also dependent claims e.g. directed to a bundle of those membranes, bundle 
plus means for injecting air into the bundle. 
 

7Answer to question 3 

Time limit for entering the EP-phase with PCT-1 lapsed on 29.02.2012. 
However, further processing is still possible. Further processing can be 
requested even before receiving notification of the loss of rights. 
 
Request further processing by paying the fees and complete the omitted acts, 
i.e. all steps necessary to enter the regional phase. 
 
Once the filing fee has been paid for PCT-1 (Euro-)PCT-1 will be Art. 54(3) 
EPC prior art against claim 1 of EP-WG. 
 
File third party observations or an opposition against EP-WG pointing to Euro-
PCT-1 and/or EP-2.  
 
Watergate will be able to obtain a European patent based on claim 2 of  
EP-WG.  
 
Provided that the national requirements are met, Watergate may claim 
compensation from Membrain based on provisional protection conferred by 
EP-WG as Membrain are manufacturing the modules in Austria.  
 
In turn, Membrain might be able to claim compensation based on provisional 
protection conferred by PCT-1. 
 
Watergate will have patent rights to the modules using polymer P membranes 
enabling them to prevent Membrain from exploiting modules comprising the 
membranes made of P, with or without the coating with K. Membrain will be 
able to prevent Watergate from exploiting Watergate's modules using 
membranes made of P and comprising the nozzle N in Europe and in the 


- 6 - 

emerging countries using the rights conferred by national patents based on 
PCT-1.  
 
Negotiate a cross-license agreement that may include: Membrain can 
produce modules made of P in Europe and Watergate can produce modules 
comprising the nozzle N in Europe. 
 
Neither Watergate nor Membrain will have protection for the modules using 
cheaper nozzles available on the market together with membranes without the 
coating K, thus, Membrain can produce/sell those modules, but cannot 
prevent Watergate from doing the same. 
 

8Answer to question 4 

The decision of the opposition division is still open to appeal, as the two-
months time limit runs from notification of the written decision. The time limit 
for filing the appeal is 8.05.2012. The time limit for filing the statement of 
grounds is 9.07.2012. 
 
The Encyclopaedia was published on the filing date of EP-CART, and thus is 
not prior art itself. However, a teaching doesn’t become common general 
knowledge because it is published in a textbook but rather is included therein 
because it was common general knowledge before the date of publication of 
the book. The Encyclopaedia reflects common general knowledge; thus the 
Encyclopaedia may be used as evidence to show that it was common general 
knowledge before the filing date to use compound R for pore size control.  
 
The subject-matter of claim 1 thus lacks an inventive step over the 
combination of D1 and common general knowledge since there is no 
unexpected technical effect.  
 
Lack of inventive step is a fresh ground of opposition.  
 
If Dialab appeals, Membrain may intervene as an assumed infringer even at 
the appeal stage. The time limit for intervention is 3 months from institution of 
the infringement proceedings against Membrain, i.e. 7.05.2012. In order to 
keep the proceedings running Dialab must file a notice of appeal: pay the 
appeal fee and file reasons in due course.  
 
In appeal proceedings a fresh ground of opposition by the opponent-appellant 
will be examined only if the patentee agrees . Thus, if Dialab themselves raise 
the fresh ground of inventive step, Watergate must agree to the examination 
of this ground of opposition. In contrast, if Membrain intervene in the appeal 
proceedings, they may raise this fresh ground without the consent of 
Watergate. 


- 7 - 

Membrain must file a notice of intervention; include proof of institution of the 
infringement proceedings, pay the opposition fee, submit reasons; raise the 
ground of lack of inventive step based on D1 and common general 
knowledge. Common general knowledge does not need to be substantiated 
unless contested, but as it is likely that Watergate will challenge this, it is 
prudent to file a copy of the Encyclopaedia as soon as possible, i.e. together 
with the notice of intervention. 
 
Make sure that Dialab do not withdraw their appeal since otherwise the 
proceedings would be terminated.  
 



