Examiners’ Report Paper D 2016 
 
General Comments 
 
 
Many candidates did not manage to correctly apply Rule 126(2) EPC. Those 

candidates adding 10 days to e.g. the date on which the applicant received the 

notification of the decision clearly were not awarded full marks. 

 
Candidates are reminded that they should pay attention to the way the questions are 

asked and should not simply repeat information from the paper in the answer. 

Repeating information per se is not awarded any points. 

 
 
 
Examiners’ Report Paper D 2016 – Part I 
 
 
Question 1 (6 marks) 
 
 
Not all candidates realized that announcing the decision during oral proceedings 

does not trigger the time limit for filing an appeal. Most candidates correctly 

answered that the appeal fee is fully reimbursed if the appeal is withdrawn before 

expiry of the time limit for filing the grounds of appeal. Some candidates argued for 

question b2) that the fee will not be reimbursed because there is no evidence of a 

substantial procedural violation. These candidates seem to have based their answer 

on a previous version of Rule 103 EPC. 

 
Question 2 (10 marks) 
 
 
Few candidates discerned the fact that because PCT-C is filed in Italian, the EPO  

will forward PCT-C to the International Bureau acting as receiving Office. Candidates 

were not generally aware of the different language requirements for filing PCT or 

European patent applications with the EPO. 

 
Question 3 (7 marks) 
 
 
Neither candidates who answered that the national route was closed for Lithuania 

nor candidates who answered that it is still possible to enter into the national phase 

in Lithuania lost marks, because some official communications were not clear on this 

topic. 

1


Many candidates were aware of the possibility of requesting accelerated processing. 

However, few candidates pointed out that in addition the applicant has to waive the 

right to be asked whether he wishes to proceed further, and waive the right to 

receive the communication under Rule 161(2) EPC. 

 
Question 4 (9 marks) 
 
 
Few candidates fully grasped the consequences of the fact that the subject-matter of 

claims 16 and 17 is deemed to be abandoned. Answers only referring to Article 84 

EPC for lack of support for claim 16 or Article 82 EPC for claim 17 were not awarded 

any points. 

 
Question 5 (8 marks) 
 
 
Question 5 was well answered, although some candidates, rather than referring to 

Rule 165 EPC, seemed to imply that all requirements of Rule 159(1) EPC have to be 

met before Euro-PCT-F can be considered prior art under Article 54(3) EPC. 

2


Possible solution – Paper D 2016 – Part I 
 
Answer to question 1 
 
 
a) According to Article 108 EPC, the notice of appeal shall be filed within 2 months of 

notification of the decision. The decision is dated 14 July 2015 and thus deemed to 

be delivered on 24 July 2015, Rule 126(2) EPC. Therefore, a notice of appeal should 

have been filed by 24 September 2015. 

 
b1) Within four months of notification of the decision, a statement setting out the 

grounds of appeal shall be filed. The grounds should have been submitted by 

24 November 2015. 

 
Since the applicant withdrew the appeal before expiry of the four month period, the 

appeal fee will be 100% reimbursed, Rule 103(1)(b) EPC. 

 
b2) Since the minimum time period that can be specified for responding to the 

communication under Rule 100(2) EPC is two months, Rule 132(2) EPC, the 

applicant withdrew the appeal before any possible expiry of the time limit. Therefore, 

50% of the appeal will be reimbursed, Rule 103(2)(b) EPC. 

 
Answer to question 2 
 
 
a) In accordance with Rule 19.1 PCT, MAXIMA is entitled to file PCT-B with the 

Italian patent office as receiving Office. 

 
An international application may claim priority of an earlier application filed in or for 

any country to the Paris Convention, Article 8(1) PCT. An international application 

that has obtained a filing date is equivalent to a regular national filing, under the 

Paris Convention and its priority can be claimed Article 11(4) PCT. The fact that no 

fees were paid is irrelevant for obtaining a filing date for PCT-B. Thus, priority can be 

claimed from PCT-B. 

 
PCT-B and PCT-C have been filed by the same applicant and the contents of PCT-B 

and PCT-C are identical. 

3


The priority period expired on Sunday, 7 February 2016, Article 8(2)(a) PCT and 

Article 4C(1) Paris Convention. Pursuant to Rule 2.4 PCT in conjunction with Rule 

80.5 PCT, the priority period is extended until Monday, 8 February 2016. 
 
 
Where the EPO acts as receiving Office, an international application cannot be filed 

in Italian, it must be filed in English, French or German, Rule 157(2) EPC. Therefore, 

the EPO must forward PCT-C to the International Bureau, Rule 19.4(b) PCT. The 

EPO is deemed to have received PCT-C on behalf of the International Bureau as 

receiving Office, Rule 19.4(a) PCT. Thus, PCT-C is deemed received on 8 February 

2016 at the International Bureau. Therefore, PCT-C was filed within the priority year 

and the priority is considered valid. 

 
b) Since PCT-C has been filed with the International Bureau as receiving Office, the 

competent searching authority is the EPO, Article 16(3)(b) PCT, Rules 35.1 and 

35.3(a) PCT, in conjunction with Article 3 of the Agreement between EPO and the 

International Bureau of WIPO as published in Official Journal 2010, page 304 and 

Article 152 EPC. 

 
The applicant has to file a translation of PCT-C for the purpose of international 

search into one of the languages accepted by the EPO, i.e. English, French or 

German, Rule 12.3 PCT and Official Journal 2014, A117. The translation has to be 

furnished to the International Bureau, Rule 12.3(a) PCT. 

 
Answer to question 3 
 
 
For the Netherlands and Italy it was not possible to enter the national phase, 

because these countries had closed the national route in accordance with Article 

45(2) PCT before the filing date of PCT-D.  For Lithuania the national route was 

available, because PCT-D was filed before the date on which the national route was 

closed, see PCT Applicant’s Guide, Annex B1, "General Information" for each of 

these states, and PCT Gazette. 

 
PCT-D was filed in Russian, searched by the Russian Patent Office as International 

Searching Authority and in accordance with Rule 48.3(a) PCT published in Russian. 

Since the Euro-PCT application is published in "another language", Article 153(4) 

EPC requires that a translation in DE/EN/FR is filed with the EPO. In accordance 

4


with Rule 159(1)(a) EPC, the translation has to be filed upon entry into the European 

phase, i.e. today. The applicant also has to specify the application documents on 

which the European grant procedure is to be based, Rule 159(1)(b) EPC. 

 
The applicant must file a valid request for examination including payment of the 

examination fee, see point 15 of the Notice from the EPO concerning the request for 

early processing, Official Journal 2013, page 156, and request accelerated 

prosecution, Guidelines E-VII,3.2. The applicant should waive the right to be asked 

under Rule 70(2) EPC whether he wishes to proceed further, see point 16 of the 

Notice from the EPO, and waive the right to receive the communication under 

Rule 161(2) EPC, Official Journal 2011, page 354. 
 
 
Answer to question 4 
 
 
The application documents on which the European grant procedure is to be based, 

comprise more than 15 claims. Therefore, claims fees should have been paid for 

claims 16 and 17, Rule 162(1) EPC. 

 
a1) Since no claims fees have been paid, claims 16 and 17 are deemed to be 

abandoned under Rule 162(4) EPC. Thus, the supplementary search is based on 

claims 1 to 15. 

 
a2) As the subject-matter of claim 16 is deemed to be abandoned and not otherwise 

to be found in the description or drawings of PCT-E, it cannot be reintroduced into 

the claims, Guidelines E-VIII, 2.1.3. Thus, EP-E cannot be granted with the subject- 

matter of claim 16. 

 
a3) As claim 17 is not unitary with the searched subject-matter, it cannot be granted 

in EP-E, Rule 137(3) EPC or Rule 137(5) EPC. The subject-matter of claim 17 can 

only be granted through a divisional application. 

 
b) Because no excess claims fees had previously been paid under Rule 162 EPC, 

the applicant will be invited to pay excess claims fees in respect of claims 16 to 19, 

Rule 71(4) EPC. 

5


Answer to question 5 
 
 
PCT-F has a priority date which is earlier than the date of filing of EP-G, but has 

been published after said date of filing. In accordance with Article 153(5) EPC and 

Rule 165 EPC, Euro-PCT-F shall be considered as prior art under Article 54(3) EPC, 

if the filing fee under Rule 159(1)(c) EPC has been paid and a translation has been 

filed. As all necessary documents, including the translation, have been filed, the 

requirements of Rule 159(1)(a)EPC have been met. 

 
Since no filing fee has been paid, the EPO communicates to the applicant that the 

application is deemed to be withdrawn, Rules 160(1) and (2) EPC. The 

communication of the loss of rights is deemed delivered on 25 January 2016, Rule 

126(2) EPC. Further processing can be requested by payment of the prescribed fee 

within two months of the communication, i.e. until 25 March 2016, Rule 135(1) EPC. 

Since the period expires on Easter Friday, it is extended to 29 March 2016, 

Rule 134(1) EPC. The filing fee has to be paid within the same period. 
 
 
The time limit for filing a notice of opposition expires on 25 August 2016, Article 99 

EPC. Company F should file an opposition based on the ground that the claim of EP- 

G lacks novelty with respect to the disclosure of Euro-PCT-F, Article 100(a) EPC. 

6


Examiners’ Report Paper D 2016 – Part II 
 
 
Some candidates did not follow the scheme that was given in question 1. Instead of 

discussing the patent situation by subject matter, as was requested, they discussed 

it by patent application. This approach often resulted in an incomplete analysis for a 

particular subject matter and earned fewer marks. If the conclusions were not 

present, e.g. “elliptical rib takes away novelty of rib in general”, the relevant points 

were missed. 

 
 
Generally, parts a), b) and e) of question 1, and parts b) and e) of question 2 were 

well answered. 

 
 
The insufficiency problem for capsules with ribs in general was often not recognized. 

Very few candidates saw that claim 1 of PCT-SA lacked the essential feature of 

material X. 

 
 
Although many candidates recognized that a French company is not entitled to file 

an appeal in Dutch, few came to the conclusion that the appeal was deemed not 

filed. Therefore, a new appeal had to be filed and the appeal fee had to be paid 

again. 

 
 
Most candidates recognized that FR2-SA is the first filing for additive G. However, 

fewer candidates realized that priority of FR2-SA could be added to PCT-SA. 

 
 
Question 3 was generally well answered. 

7


Possible solution – Paper D 2016 – Part II 
 
 
 
Question 1 
 
 
 
a) plastic coffee capsules having an elliptical rib 
 
 
 
CH-BC is the first filing for capsules having an elliptical rib. There is no relevant prior 

art and the technical effect is that piercing is improved: a claim to a capsule having 

an elliptical rib seems to be novel and inventive. 

 
 
PCT-BC validly claims priority from CH-BC because applicants and subject matter 

are the same, and the priority period is extended from 1 August 2015 to 3 August 

2015 (Saturday ->Monday). CH-BC is not enabling for capsules with ribs in general 

so that priority is valid only for capsules with elliptical ribs. 

 
 
If PCT-BC and PCT-SA both enter the European regional phase, PCT-BC would 

constitute a prior right under Article 54(3) EPC, and would destroy novelty of any 

possible claim to a capsule having an elliptical rib in PCT-SA. 

 
 
BC will be able to obtain protection for a capsule having an elliptical rib made from 

any material from PCT-BC. 

 
 
b) plastic coffee capsules having a triangular rib 
 
 
 
FR-SA is the first filing for capsules having a triangular rib.  

 
PCT-SA validly claims priority from FR-SA: the applicants are identical, the subject- 

matter is the same, and PCT-SA was filed within the priority period which is 

extended from 12 December 2015 to 14 December 2015 (Saturday->Monday).  

If PCT-BC became prior right under Article 54(3) EPC, it would not take away 

novelty and would not be relevant for inventive step of capsules with triangular ribs. 

 

8


There is no relevant prior art and the triangular rib has the technical effect of 

improving the piercing of the capsule. A claim to a capsule having a triangular rib 

would seem to be novel and inventive. 

 
 
A triangular rib is disclosed but not claimed in FR-SA or in PCT-SA or in any other 

patent application. 

 
 
c) plastic coffee capsules having a rib 
 
 
 
CH-BC is the first filing for capsules having a rib. 
 
 
 
Material X is essential to make a generic rib and CH-BC and PCT-BC do not contain 

any reference to material X in claims or description. Therefore claims to a capsule 

having a generic rib in both CH-BC and PCT-BC are not sufficiently disclosed over 

their entire scope. 

 
 
The disclosure of a capsule with elliptical ribs in PCT-BC is novelty destroying under 

Art 54(3) EPC for the claim to a capsule having a rib in PCT-SA. 

 
 
Material X is disclosed in FR-SA and PCT-SA. The claim of PCT-SA is missing the 

essential feature of material X for a capsule having a rib of a shape other than 

triangular or elliptical. 

 
 
The claim in FR-SA and in PCT-SA is not sufficiently disclosed over its entire scope. 

A claim to a capsule having a rib made of material X would be novel and inventive. 

As it stands, BC will be able to obtain protection for a capsule having a rib made 

from any material from PCT-BC. 

 
 
d) plastic coffee capsules made of material X 
 
 
 
Capsules made of material X are disclosed in document D. Document D is prior art 

under Article 54(2) EPC for EP1-BC, thus EP1-BC lacks novelty over document D. 

EP1-BC is currently in force and can be used to prevent SA from selling capsules 

made of material X. 

9


SA is a French company, thus SA is not entitled to file an appeal in Dutch. The 

appeal is deemed not filed and the appeal fee will be reimbursed. 

 
 
e) coffee powder containing additive G 
 
 
 
FR2-SA is the first filing for coffee powder containing additive G because FR1-SA 

was withdrawn in August 2013 without leaving any rights outstanding and without 

having served as a basis for claiming a right of priority. 

 
 
There is no relevant prior art. Additive G is only known as stabilizer for cosmetics. G 

has the technical effect of increasing extraction. Thus, a claim to coffee powder 

containing additive G seems to be novel and inventive. 

 
 
PCT-SA discloses coffee powder containing additive G, but does not have any claim 

to coffee powder containing additive G. PCT-SA does not claim priority from FR2- 

SA. PCT-BC was filed after FR2-SA but before PCT-SA. Once regionalized, PCT-BC 

would be prior art under Article 54(3) EPC for PCT-SA. 

 
 
Question 2 
 
 
 
a) plastic coffee capsules having an elliptical rib 
 
 
 
Add a claim to a capsule having an elliptical rib in PCT-SA or in any application 

resulting therefrom to get protection in countries where PCT-BC does not enter the 

national/regional phase. 

 
 
b) plastic coffee capsules having a triangular rib 
 
 
 
Add a claim to a capsule having a triangular rib in PCT-SA or in any application 

resulting therefrom. Such a claim may be added in the international phase of PCT- 

SA or on entry of EP or national phases. 

 
 
c) plastic coffee capsules having a rib 

10


File third party observations (possible in the PCT phase), citing FR-SA and/or PCT- 

SA and mentioning insufficient disclosure of plastic coffee capsules having a rib and 

being made of a material other than material X. 

 
 
It is also possible to file an opposition on the ground of insufficiency of disclosure 

once PCT-BC has entered the EP phase and has been granted. 

 
 
In case of third party observations and/or opposition, a European patent based on 

PCT-BC will not be granted or will be revoked for a claim directed to a capsule with a 

rib. 

With respect to FR-SA and in PCT-SA, file an amended claim directed to a capsule 

having a rib and being made of material X. The claim would be considered unitary by 

the EPO since such a rib is a corresponding special technical feature when 

compared to a triangular rib or to an elliptical rib. 

 
 
d) plastic coffee capsules made of material X 
 
 
 
The time limit for filing an appeal expires on 9 March 2016 (30 December 2015 plus 

10 days plus 2 months). 

File a new notice of appeal in an official language. Pay the appeal fee. The appeal 

fee paid by the Dutch representative will be refunded. File the grounds of appeal - 

until 9 May 2016 and discuss the prima facie relevance of document D. 

Lack of novelty was already raised as the ground for opposition. 
 
 
 
e) coffee powder containing additive G. 
 
 
 
PCT-SA was filed within the priority year of FR2-SA. The period for adding a priority 

claim in PCT-SA has not lapsed. A priority claim to FR2-SA should be added in PCT- 

SA, by 14 April 2016. 

 
 
Upon addition of the priority claim to FR2-SA, PCT-SA will have the earliest effective 

date for coffee powder containing additive G, and will become a prior right for PCT- 

BC. 

11


The claim to coffee powder containing additive G in PCT-BC then will lack novelty 

over PCT-SA. 

 
 
File third party observations, (either in the international phase or in the European 

phase), and/or file an opposition against a European patent resulting from PCT-BC. 

Add a claim in PCT-SA directed to coffee with additive G. This can be done in the 

international phase or on entry to the EP/national phases. 

 
 
Coffee powder containing additive G is not unitary with a plastic capsule having a rib. 

Therefore file a divisional application for coffee powder containing G. 

 
 
Question 3 
 
 
 
a) plastic coffee capsules having an elliptical rib 
 
 
 
BC can stop SA from selling plastic coffee capsules having an elliptical rib, based on 

the patent originating from CH-BC in Switzerland, and/or the patent(s) originating 

from PCT-BC. 

 
 
b) plastic coffee capsules having a triangular rib 
 
 
 
SA can stop BC from selling plastic coffee capsules having a triangular rib, based on 

the patent originating from FR-SA in France, and/or the patent(s) originating from 

PCT-SA. 

 
 
c) plastic coffee capsules having a rib 
 
 
 
SA can stop BC from selling plastic coffee capsules having a rib made from material 

X, based on the patent originating from FR-SA in France, and/or the patent(s) 

originating from PCT-SA. 

12


d) plastic coffee capsules made of material X 
 
 
 
When EP1-BC is revoked, neither SA nor BC can stop the other party from 

producing plastic coffee capsules from material X, as long as the capsules do not 

contain a rib. 

 
 
e) coffee powder containing additive G 
 
SA can stop BC from selling coffee powder containing additive G, based on FR2-SA 

in France, and/or the patent(s) originating from PCT-SA. 

13


EXAMINATION COMMITTEE III 
 
Paper D - 2016 - Marking Sheet 
 
Category 
Maximum possible 

Part I 

Part I-Question 1 
6 

Part I-Question 2 
10 

Part I-Question 3 
7 

Part I-Question 4 
9 

Part I-Question 5 
8 

Part II 

Part II-Question 1a 
7 

Part II-Question 1b 
6 

Part II-Question 1c 
9 

Part II-Question 1d 
6 

Part II-Question 1e 
7 

Part II-Question 2 
18 

Part II-Question 3 
7 

Total 
100 

 

14


