EN

EUROPEAN QUALIFYING EXAMINATION 2022

Paper D2

This paper comprises:

Questions 1-4 (55 points)

2022/D/EN
0-2

Part II: Legal Opinion


2022/D/EN/7

Today is 8 March 2022. 

You receive the following e-mail from the firm Optimisme.

Dear Representative,

[001] My   name   is   Candide.   I   am   the   General   Manager   of   Italian   company 

Optimisme (OPT). OPT specialises in plastic recycling. We design our own recycling 

machines  in-house  and  we  have  them  made  by  Torre  (TOR),  an  Italian  company 

manufacturing plastic recycling machines. When we started working with TOR in 2018, 

we signed an agreement. Under this agreement, TOR is bound to secrecy, and all 

intellectual property generated since then belongs to OPT. In future, we will manufacture 

these machines ourselves.

[002] A known process of recycling includes cutting the plastic waste into small pieces in 

a mill, i.e. in a container with blades rotating at its bottom. An inorganic filler in the form 

of a powder is fed to the mill to be mixed with the plastic pieces to increase rigidity of the 

plastic. The problem with this known machine is that the maximum amount of filler that 

can be fed to the mill is 10% by weight. If higher amounts are fed to the mill, part of the 

filler is ejected outside the machine and a lot of dust is generated. Conventionally, to 

reach 50% by weight of filler, the plastic exiting the mill must be processed with another 

machine, where more filler is mixed with the plastic.

[003] In January 2019, we invented a new machine for recycling plastic. In our machine 

the filler is fed to the bottom of the mill so that it is mixed with the plastic pieces while the 

plastic waste is cut. This is a great improvement over the prior techniques: we can feed 

up to 50% of filler to the plastic in the mill and during the process less dust is generated, 

so that workers are safer than before.


[004]  On 3  June 2019  we gave TOR our  complete technical drawings and a  fully 

enabling explanatory report to enable them to manufacture our machine, which we 

called FEED. On 1 July 2019 we received a prototype of the FEED machine with one 

feeding duct at the bottom of the mill. We modified the FEED machine received from 

TOR by adding a second feeding duct at the bottom of the mill. We discovered that by 

using two feeding ducts for the filler, a surprisingly greater uniformity of the recycled 

plastic  can  be  obtained.  We  filed  a  European  patent  application,  OPT-EP1,  on  

22 July 2019. OPT-EP1 discloses and claims a machine comprising at least one duct for 

feeding filler at the bottom of the mill. OPT-EP1 also discloses the machine with two 

feeding ducts at the bottom of the mill. This feature is claimed in dependent claim 2.

[005] After filing OPT-EP1, we realised that by mounting a special water spray device 

(SPRAY) on the FEED machine it is possible to reduce the dust generated by the 

machine,   surprisingly   without   affecting   the   properties   of   the   recycled   plastic.  

On 4 October 2019, we filed European patent application OPT-EP2 without claiming any 

priority. OPT-EP2 includes the entire description and claims of OPT-EP1; it additionally 

discloses the SPRAY device and the FEED machine with the SPRAY device mounted 

on it.

[006]  On 30 September 2020, we filed international application OPT-PCT. OPT-PCT 

contains  the  entire  description  and  claims  of  OPT-EP2  and  additionally  claims  the 

SPRAY device per se, and the FEED machine with the SPRAY device mounted on it. 

OPT-PCT claims priority from OPT-EP2.

[007] OPT-EP1   was   granted   as   filed.   The   mention   of   grant   was   published  

on 27 January 2021. OPT-EP1 was opposed by a German lawyer. The grounds of 

opposition are lack of novelty and inventive step based on two documents.

2022/D/EN/8


[008] The  first  document  is  TOR-EP,  a  European  patent  application  filed  by  TOR  

on 3 June 2019. The figures in TOR-EP are identical to the drawings we gave TOR, and 

the paragraphs of the description are identical to paragraphs of the report we gave to 

them. TOR-EP has a single claim directed to a machine having a duct for feeding filler at 

the bottom.

[009] TOR-EP   discloses   a   subject-matter   almost   identical   to   the   subject-matter  

of OPT-EP1. The only difference is that TOR-EP is silent on the two feeding ducts of 

OPT-EP1.   TOR-EP   is   also   silent   on   the   water   spray   device   of   OPT-EP2.   A 

communication of the intention to grant was sent to TOR five days ago.

[010]  The second document is one of our own videos showing our prototype FEED 

machine and explaining how it works. We uploaded the video to our website, where it 

has been publicly available since 10 July 2019. The prototype machine disclosed in the 

video has only one feeding duct and no water spray device. According to the opponent, 

a claim directed to a machine having two feeding ducts is obvious in view of a machine 

having a single duct.

[011]  We received a communication from the Opposition Division dated 3 December 2021

inviting us to file a response to the opposition within four months. Please help us to 

prepare our response. In our opinion, the opposition should be rejected because it was 

filed by a lawyer who has no interest in the case. 

[012] There is another surprising advantage of having two ducts for feeding the filler to 

the bottom of the mill. We recently discovered that when filler in the form of a powder is 

fed from one duct and filler in the form of granules is fed from a second duct, the blades 

of the mill remain clean. The granules are made by compacting the filler powder. This 

feeding process, which we call CLEAN, provides an important advantage because it 

saves up to 30% of the costs of the recycling process by avoiding the machine having to 

be stopped in order to clean the blades. Feeding granules only does not provide this 

advantage.

2022/D/EN/9


[013] As it is such a valuable development, we want to protect the CLEAN process with 

a  patent  application.  Before filing  the  application,  we want to  know  the  Opposition 

Division’s opinion on it. Our idea is to explain this newly discovered advantage of having 

two ducts when arguing inventive step, in our written response to the opposition.

[014] We filed our OPT-PCT application in view of a joint venture we plan to enter with 

Avidus, an investment fund which will help us to manufacture our own machines and 

expand our activities in the US, China and India.

[015] There is another problem with TOR. Two weeks ago we received a “cease and 

desist” letter from TOR requesting us to cease any use of our FEED machine with the 

SPRAY device in view of their European patent TOR-EP-old. TOR-EP-old discloses and 

claims a water spray device that is identical to the one we make and use in our machine 

and which is disclosed in OPT-EP2. This water spray device was shown by TOR for a 

different purpose at a fair in Barcelona in 2014 which we attended. This water spray 

device was fully disclosed in a brochure with a date on it, which was handed out at the 

fair and is in our possession.

[016] TOR-EP-old was filed in 2015 without claiming priority and was granted in 2017. 

Avidus  filed  an  opposition  against  TOR-EP-old  on  the  ground  of  insufficiency  of 

disclosure only. The opposition was rejected and Avidus appealed the decision of the 

Opposition Division. The appeal is pending.

[017] We attempted to contact TOR to resolve the above issues, but TOR refused to talk 

to us. Avidus informed us that they were contacted by TOR. TOR is using TOR-EP to 

convince Avidus to replace us with TOR in the joint venture. Avidus told us that if they 

reach an agreement with TOR, they will withdraw their appeal. 

2022/D/EN/10


We have a meeting with Avidus scheduled for next week, and we need your help on the 

following points:

1.
Outline the patent situation as it currently stands for:

(a)
the FEED machine with a feeding duct at the bottom of the mill

(b)
the FEED machine with two feeding ducts at the bottom of the mill

(c)
the CLEAN feeding process

(d)
the SPRAY water spray device

(e)
the FEED machine with the SPRAY water spray device

2.
How would you advise us to respond to the opposition against OPT-EP1?

3.
What could we do to improve our situation?

4.
After the improvements, what products and methods could we stop TOR from 

making or using, and in which countries?

2022/D/EN/11


