EN

EUROPEAN QUALIFYING EXAMINATION 2023

Paper D1-1

This Paper comprises: 

Part I: Legal Questions

Question 1:
10 marks

Question 2:
  10 marks

Question 3:
  7 marks

2023/D/EN
0-1


2023/D/EN/1

QUESTION 1
(10 MARKS)

Applicant A filed a European patent application EP-A, which describes and claims


a first invention comprising two alternative solutions to a technical problem 

consisting of features B+C and B+D respectively, and


a second invention consisting of features E+F.

The first and second inventions are not linked by a single general inventive concept. 

Only the first invention was searched, and relevant prior art was found only for B+C. In 

the light of the technical problem, it is directly and unambiguously apparent that 

feature B is indispensable for the function of the first invention.

Applicant A filed divisional applications DIV1 and DIV2, both based directly on EP-A. 

DIV1 as filed claims and describes only feature D. DIV2 as filed claims and describes 

only the combination B+D+F, wherein F is presented as an optional feature.

Subsequently, the examining division issued a written decision dated 3 January 2023, 

refusing EP-A on the ground that a claim directed to B+C lacked novelty. 

Today, DIV1 and DIV2 are pending.

(a) Can valid patents be obtained for DIV1 and DIV2 and what should be done?

(b) Can applicant A still prosecute invention E+F and what should be done?


2023/D/EN/2

QUESTION 2
(10 MARKS)

On 5 May 2022, applicant B resident in France filed an international patent application 

PCT-B with the EPO as receiving Office. Applicant B intended to claim priority from the 

US application US-B filed by applicant B on 9 July 2021. While the priority claim in the 

request of PCT-B stated the correct filing date of US-B, it included a typographical error 

in one digit of the application number of US-B. The request contained a certified copy of 

US-B. 

The description of PCT-B includes a statement that priority is claimed from US-B 

indicating the correct application number of US-B. Otherwise the description, the claims 

and the drawings are identical to those of US-B.

In May 2022, applicant B received an invitation issued by the EPO as receiving Office to 

correct the priority claimed in the request of PCT-B. Unfortunately, applicant B 

overlooked this invitation and did not reply to it.

The EPO acting as International Searching Authority transmitted the international search

report to applicant B on 12 July 2022.

(a) Is the priority claim considered to have been made for the purposes of the procedure

under the PCT?

(b) What is the last day to file a demand for international preliminary examination?

(c) Is it still possible to rectify the priority claim in the international phase?


2023/D/EN/3

QUESTION 3
(7 MARKS)

Company C filed European patent application EP-C on 14 September 2018. The 

mention of the grant of EP-C was published on 8 June 2022.

Company D is concerned about infringing EP-C with its products sold in Germany 

since July 2022. Company D is preparing notice of opposition against EP-C and is 

confident that it will get the patent revoked.

Today, company D consults the European Patent Register and notices that the 

representative of company C sent a fax to the EPO containing both a request that 

EP-C be revoked and an order to debit the revocation fee from its deposit account.

Company D also noticed that company C has not yet paid any renewal fees to the 

German Patent and Trade Mark Office.

(a) What is the current status of the revocation proceedings for EP-C?

(b) Why should company D file opposition against EP-C?


