1 
 

Model solution for part 1 
 
Question 1: D 
 
Legal basis 
Rule 159(1) EPC 

The examination fee and designation fee must also be paid (six months after 
publication of search report; payment cannot be postponed to 31 months if there is a 
wish to enter into the European phase at 25 months).  

Question 2: B 
 
Legal basis 
Guidelines for Examination in the EPO, A-X, 5.2.2 

“The designation fee falls due upon publication of the mention of the European 
search report. It may be paid within six months of the mentioned date of publication 
(Rules 39(1), 17(3) and 36(4)). Where paid before the due date, e.g. upon filing of the 
application, the designation fee will however be retained by the EPO. These 
payments will only be considered valid as from the due date, provided that the 
amount paid corresponds to the amount payable on the due date (…)” 

Question 3: B 
 
Legal basis 
OJ EPO 2024, Supplementary Publication 2,  Arrangements for deposit accounts 
(ADA), 13.2 

“13.2: A debit order with a deferred payment date (…) may be revoked in whole or in 
part in Central Fee Payment until one day before the date specified as the execution 
date at the latest.” 

Question 4: B 
 
Legal basis 
Articles 106 and 108 EPC; Article 121(1) EPC; Guidelines for Examination in the 
EPO, E-VIII, 2 

A notice of appeal could also be filed within two months of notification of the decision; 
re-establishment of rights is excluded because further processing is available. 

Question 5: D 
 
Legal basis 
Article 115 EPC, Rule 114 EPC; Guidelines for Examination in the EPO, E-VI.3 
  

A. Incorrect: a third party filing observations concerning the patentability of an 
application or patent is not a party to the proceedings; the applicant may 
respond to third-party observations but is not obliged to do so 
B. Incorrect: third-party observations may be filed anonymously 
C. Incorrect: there is no official fee when filing third-party observations 
D. Correct 
 

Question 6: B 
 
Legal basis 
Rule 40 PCT  
 
A. Incorrect: may be paid but not must be paid 
B. Correct 
C. Incorrect: only one protest fee is due (Rule 40.2(e) PCT) 
D. Incorrect: if the applicant does not pay any additional search fees, the 
information appearing in the invitation to pay additional fees will be considered 
to be the result of the international search and will be included as such in the 
international search report 
 
Question 7: D 
 
Legal basis 
PCT Applicant's Guide 5.070.; Guidelines for Examination in the EPO A-III, 6.7; 
PCT Applicant’s Guide LU-Luxembourg 
 
 
A. Only available if the priority application and the PCT application are filed with 
the same patent office  
B. Incorrect: the LPTO does not use the DAS access code  
C. Incorrect: the LPTO does not issue electronic priority documents 
D. Correct  
 
Question 8: B 
 
Legal basis 
Article 107 EPC 
 
A. Incorrect: B is not adversely affected 
B. Correct: both parties A and B are adversely affected 
C. Incorrect: third parties are not parties to the proceedings 
D. Incorrect: withdrew its opposition; no longer a party to the proceedings 
 

Question 9: D 
 
Legal basis 
 

Guidelines for Examination in the EPO, A-X, 5.2.4 
 
The renewal fee that would have been due on 31 October had to be paid for the 
decision to grant to be issued (this is one of the warnings in the communication under 
Rule 71(3) EPC). 
 
Question 10: D 
 
Legal basis 
Rule 126(2) EPC  
 
The document was delivered to the addressee nine days after the date it bears, so 
the period expires later by the number of days by which the seven days were 
exceeded, i.e. 12 January 2025 + two days. Evidence of late receipt needs to be filed 
with the response. 
 
Question 11: B 
 
Legal basis 
https://www.epo.org/en/applying/myepo-services/interact  
 
A. Incorrect: it is neither possible to access the European Patent Register nor to 
file using the EPO’s legacy Online Filing software (eOLF) via MyEPO Portfolio 
B. Correct 
C. Incorrect: it is not possible to access the European Publication Server via 
MyEPO Portfolio 
D. Incorrect: it is neither possible to access the European Publication Server nor 
to file using the EPO’s Online Filing 2.0 via MyEPO Portfolio 
 
Question 12: C 
 
Legal basis 
OJ EPO 2023, A50, point 20; Contingency Upload Service | epo.org 
 
Question 13: C 
 
Legal basis 
Guidelines for Examination in the EPO, A-VII, 3.2; Rule 3(2) EPC 
 
Since the response with the amendments has to be filed within a time limit, the 
Finnish applicant is entitled to file the amended claims in Finnish. 
A translation of a document filed in an admissible non-EPO language into an official 
language of the EPO must be filed within a non-extendable period of one month 
(Rule 6(2) EPC). This means that a translation of the amended claims must be filed 
in the language of proceedings, English in this case (Rule 3(2) EPC). 
 
 
Question 14: D 
 
Legal basis 
PCT-EPO Guidelines, B-IV, 1.2.  
 
Comments are required but not amendments. 
 
Question 15: D 
 
Legal basis 
Article 6(1) Regulation (EU) No 1260/2012; Rule 6(2)(d) UPR; Unitary Patent Guide, 
para. 65  
 
The translation may be in any of the 24 official languages of the EU, except English, 
irrespective of the language in which the application was filed or the geographical 
extent of the unitary effect.  

