EXAMINERS’ REPORT - PRE-EXAMINATION 2021 
 
PART 1 
 
Question 1 
 
The European patent application EP-A was filed on 07 September 2017. The mention of grant 
of the patent was published in the European Patent Bulletin on 10 February 2021. The 
applicant validly filed a divisional application from EP-A (EP-A- DIV) on 05 February 2021. 
 
 
1.1 
The renewal fee for EP-A in respect of the third year could have been validly paid on 
03 May 2019. 
 
TRUE – the renewal fee in respect of the third year (only) may be validly paid up to 6 
months before it falls due (30 September 2019), Rule 51(1) EPC; Guidelines A-X 5.2.4, 
OJ EPO 2018 A2 (effective from 01 April 2018). 
 
 
1.2 
The renewal fee for EP-A in respect of the fourth year was due on 07 
September 2020. 
 
FALSE – the renewal fee for the fourth year is due on the last day of the month 
containing the third anniversary of filing (i.e. 30 September 2020), (Article 86 
EPC, R51(1) EPC). 
 
 
1.3 
The renewal fee for EP-A in respect of the fifth year shall be paid to the EPO. 
 
FALSE – the obligation to pay renewal fees (to the EPO) shall terminate with the 
payment of the renewal fee due in respect of the year in which the mention of the grant 
of the European Patent is published in the European Patent Bulletin (Article 86(2) EPC; 
Article 141(1) EPC; GL 2018 A-X, 5.1.2) i.e. the renewal fee in respect of the fifth year 
is due 30 September 2021; the patent is granted before this date and therefore, the 
renewal fee is paid to national offices. 
 
 
1.4 
All renewal fees due in respect of EP-A-DIV can be validly paid without an 
additional fee on 07 June 2021. 
 
TRUE – all renewal fees already due in respect of the earlier application at the date on 
which the divisional application is filed are due on filing (i.e. the renewal in respect of the 

3rd year and the 4th year for EP-A, due on 30 Sept 2019 and 30 Sept 2020). These fees 
and any renewal fee due within 4 months of filing the divisional may be paid within the 
same 4 months i.e. 07 June 
2021 (05 June 2021 is a Saturday, so that the time limit is extended to 07June 2021) 
without an additional fee (Rule 51(3) EPC); the deadline may be extended under Rule 
134 (1) EPC to the next working day (J4/91). 

 


Question 2 
 
Anna, a French citizen, validly filed a French patent application FR-1 on 06 February 2020. On 
08 February 2021 she filed an international application PCT-1 in respect of the same subject-
matter as FR-1 at the EPO. Anna intends for PCT-1 to claim priority from FR-1. 
 
 
2.1 
PCT-1 can validly claim priority from FR-1. 
 

TRUE - Priority can be claimed in an international application filed within 12 months 
from the priority date (Art. 8(2)a) and Rule 4 PCT, Art. 4C(1) Paris Convention). The 
applicant and the subject matter is the same. The last day of the 12-month period is 6. 
February 2021 according to the calculation of periods in Rule 2.4 PCT. Since the 6. 
February 2021 is a Saturday, the time limit is extended to the next working day (8. 
February 2021) according to R. 80.5 PCT. 
 
 
2.2 
Anna can validly file the priority declaration in May 2021. 
 

TRUE - The priority declaration can be added within a time limit of 16 months from the 
priority date (which would expire on 7 June 2021, since the 6 June 2021 is a Sunday). 
Rule 26.bis PCT. 
 
 
2.3 
PCT-1 cannot validly claim priority from FR-1, if FR-1 has been abandoned before 
the filing of PCT-1. 
 
FALSE - Once the priority application has a filing date, the fate of the priority 
application is not relevant for the priority claim (Art. 8.2(a) PCT and Art 4A(3) Paris 
Convention). 
 
 
2.4 
The filing fee for PCT-1 shall be paid directly to the International Bureau. 
 

FALSE -The filing fee shall be paid within one month from the date of receipt of PCT-1 
to the receiving Office. Rule 15.1 and 15.3 PCT. 
 
 


Question 3 
 
European patent application EP-P was filed as a first filing on 16 December 2018. EP-P was 
published on 17 June 2020. Application EP-P-DIV1 was filed with the EPO on 06 December 
2019 as a divisional application from EP-P. A second divisional application from EP-P (EP-P-
DIV2) was filed with the EPO on 06 November 2020. 
Today, EP-P is still pending. Some of the claims of EP-P-DIV2 contain subject-matter that was 
not originally disclosed in EP-P. 
 
3.1 
EP-P-DIV1 was not validly filed as a divisional application of EP-P, because EP-P-
DIV1 was filed before the publication of EP-P. 
 
FALSE.- The earlier patent application must be pending (Rule 36(1) EPC). There is no 
requirement that the earlier patent application is published. 
 
 
3.2 
If EP-P was filed in Portuguese and translated into English, EP-P-DIV1 must be filed 
in English. 
 
FALSE. EP-DIV1 may be filed in the language on which the earlier application was filed 
(Portuguese) or translated (English)( Rule 36(2) EPC). 
 
 
3.3 
For EP-P-DIV2 an additional fee as part of the filing fee for a divisional 
application of a second generation had to be paid. 
 
FALSE - EP-DIV2, as it derives from EP-P, is not a second generation divisional 
application. Thus, an additional fee in accordance with R. 38(4) EPC and Art. 2(1b) RRF 
has not to be paid. 
 
 
3.4 
EP-P will be regarded as prior art under Art. 54(2) EPC against EP-P-DIV2. 
 
FALSE – According to Article 76(1) EPC, the date of filing is that of the earlier 
application. Even if EP-DIV2 contains subject-matter extending beyond the content of 
the earlier application as originally filed, it cannot be converted to an independent 
application taking 6 November 2020 as its date of filing (G1/05 and G1/06, GL C-IX, 
1.4). Therefore, the filing date of EP-DIV2 remains 16 December 2018 and EP-P is not 
prior art under Art. 54(2) EPC. 
 
 


Question 4 
 
Applicant A files today, 01 March 2021, an international application, PCT-A, with the EPO. 
PCT-A claims priority from the applicant’s European patent application, EP-A, filed on 27 
February 2020. 
 
 
4.1 
If PCT-A contains 20 claims, claims fees shall be paid for five claims within one 
month of the date of filing. 
 
FALSE – There is no claims fee for PCT applications. A claims fee is not foreseen 
in PCT (Art. 3(4)(iv) and Rules 14-16 PCT). 
 
 
4.2 
The period for entering the European phase will expire on 02 October 2023. 
 

FALSE - The time limit is 31-months from the priority date, i.e. 27.9.2022 (Art. 22(1) PCT 
and R. 159(1) EPC). 
 
 
4.3 
The publication date of PCT-A can be postponed, if the claim to priority is validly 
withdrawn before completion of the technical preparations for international 
publication. 
 
TRUE - R. 90bis.3 (d) and (e) PCT allows the postponement of the international 
publication by withdrawing its claim for priority. 
 
 
4.4 
For PCT-A to be considered as comprised in the state of the art under Article 54(3) 
EPC, it is sufficient that PCT-A is published in English. 
 
FALSE – In order that PCT-A is comprised in the art under Article 54(3) EPC, the 
requirements of Article 153(5) together with Rule 165 EPC have to be met so that also 
the filing fee under Rule 159(1)(c) EPC has to be paid. 


Question 5 
 
The mention of the grant of the European patent EP-G was published in the European Patent 
Bulletin. Competitor B filed a notice of opposition against EP-G on the last day of the 
opposition period. 
One month after expiry of the opposition period and following a request from the proprietor 
of EP-G to competitor Z to cease alleged infringement, competitor Z instituted proceedings 
for a ruling that competitor Z is not infringing patent EP-G. 
 
 
5.1 
If the notice of opposition has not been signed by the opponent or by his 
representative before expiry of the opposition period, the opposition division shall 
reject the opposition as inadmissible. 
 
FALSE - Rule 76(3) EPC in conjunction with Rule 50(3)EPC require that the notice of 
opposition is signed by the opponent or the opponent’s representative. If the notice of 
opposition has not been signed within the opposition period, the EPO will invite the 
opponent to correct this deficiency and if the opponent does not correct this deficiency 
within the specified time limit, the opposition is deemed not to have been filed. (Rule 
77(2) EPC in conjunction with Rule 50(3) EPC, Guidelines D-III, 3.4 and D-IV, 1.2.1 (ii) 
and D-IV, 1.4.1. 
 
 
5.2 
Competitor B shall file a statement setting out for the first time the grounds of 
opposition within two months from the date of filing the notice of opposition. 
 
FALSE - The notice of opposition shall contain the grounds on which the opposition is 
based and has to be filed within 9 months of the mention of the publication of the mention 
of the grant of the EP patent (Article 99(1) and Rule 76(2)(c) EPC). 
 
 
5.3 
Provided that the opposition proceedings are still pending, competitor Z can file an 
admissible notice of intervention within three months of the date on which the 
proceedings for a ruling that competitor Z is not infringing patent EP- G are instituted. 
 
TRUE - Article 105(1)(b) EPC in conjunction with Rule 89(1) EPC. 
 
 
5.4 
If W files third party observations before expiry of the nine-month opposition period, 
W will be summoned to any oral proceedings taking place before the opposition 
division. 
 
FALSE – A third party filing observations does not become party to the opposition 
proceedings (Article 115 EPC last sentence) and, in consequence, W will not be 
summoned to any oral proceedings (Rule 115(1) EPC). 


PART 2 
 
Question 6 
 
A European patent application, EP-X, relating to invention X was filed in January 2020. EP-X 
includes two alternative embodiments: X1 and X2. Embodiment X1 is not sufficiently disclosed 
as essential technical information is missing. Embodiment X2 is sufficiently disclosed. 
 
 
6.1 
An objection from the examining division under Article 83 EPC regarding 
embodiment X1 can be overcome by filing additional technical information. 
 
FALSE - The European patent application must disclose the invention in a manner 
sufficiently clear and complete for it to be carried out by a person skilled in the art 
(Article 83 EPC). 
 
 
6.2 
If the examining division does not raise any objection under Article 83 EPC, lack of 
sufficiency of disclosure will not be a valid ground for opposition against the patent 
granted on the basis of EP-X. 
 
FALSE - A valid ground for opposition is lack of sufficiency of disclosure, Article 
100(b) EPC. It is irrelevant if the examining division did not raise an objection under 
Article 83 EPC. 
 
 
6.3 
If the missing essential technical information regarding embodiment X1 is present in the 
abstract, the essential technical information can be incorporated into EP-X as missing 
parts within one month from the date of filing. 
 
FALSE - The abstract is not part of the disclosure (Article 85 EPC) so including the 
essential technical information from the abstract would offend Article 123(2) EPC. 
 
 
6.4 
An objection from the examining division under Article 83 EPC can be 
overcome by restricting EP-X to embodiment X2. 
 
TRUE - If X2 is sufficiently disclosed, a patent may be granted based on X2 
(Guidelines F-III, 5.1). 


Question 7 
 
The applicant Mr Y filed a European patent application EP-Y. In the summons to oral 
proceedings, the examining division objected to claim 1 of EP-Y as not having an inventive step 
in view of document D1 in combination with the skilled person´s common general knowledge. 
At the oral proceedings before the examining division, the professional representative of Mr Y 
is accompanied by Professor N. The professional representative requests that Professor N is 
allowed to make oral submissions during the oral proceedings. Professor N is a well-known 
expert in the technical field of the patent application and has recently been awarded a Nobel 
prize for her work in that technical field. 
 
Moreover, Professor N is accompanied by five of her students who also wish to attend the oral 
proceedings. Neither the presence of Professor N nor that of her students had been 
announced prior to the oral proceedings. 
 
 
7.1 
The examining division may admit auxiliary requests filed and signed by 
Professor N during the oral proceedings. 
 
FALSE - Professor N is not the representative of the party Article 134(1) EPC Guidelines, 
E-III, 8.5, G 4/95). 
 
 
7.2 
The EPC does not provide for the hearing of witnesses during examination 
proceedings. 
 
FALSE - Article 117 EPC applies to any proceedings before the EPO including 
examination proceedings so that a witness can be heard during examination 
proceedings. 
 
 
7.3 
The students of Professor N may attend the oral proceedings as members of the public. 

 
FALSE - Article 116(3) EPC: the oral proceedings before the examining division are not 
public. Therefore, the students of Professor N may not attend the oral proceedings as 
members of the public. 
 
 
7.4 
Professor N has the right to make oral submissions during the oral proceedings, 
since she must be considered by the examining division to represent the “person 
skilled in the art”. 
 
FALSE - The EPC does not provide a right for experts to make oral submissions in 
representation of the skilled person. The requirements for making oral submissions as 
accompanying person are set in G4/95 and Guidelines E-III, 8.5. 


Question 8 
 
European patent EP-C was opposed on the grounds of lack of novelty and lack of an 
inventive step. The opposition division rejected the opposition. The opponent filed an 
admissible appeal against the decision of the opposition division. Appeal proceedings 
concerning European patent EP-C are currently pending. 
 
A fresh ground of opposition under Article 100(b) EPC can now be introduced into the appeal 
procedure… 
 
 
8.1 
…  since the patent proprietor is party to the appeal proceedings as of right. 
 

FALSE – The criteria for the admissibility of a fresh ground of opposition as set out in 
G10/91. This situation is not a criteria for the admissibility of a fresh ground for 
opposition according to G10/91. 
 
 
8.2 
… provided that the board of appeal considers the ground of opposition as prima facie 
relevant, even if the patent proprietor does not agree to its introduction. 
 
FALSE - Such a fresh ground cannot be introduced by the board of appeal at this 
stage of the proceedings, even using its powers under Article 114(1) EPC (G10/91). 
 
 
8.3 
… provided that the fresh ground is raised by third party observations under Article 
115 EPC, even if the patent proprietor does not agree to its introduction. 
 
FALSE - The same applies to third party observations under Article 115 EPC as 
third party observations are also not one of the criteria set out in G10/91. 
 
8.4 
… provided that the fresh ground is raised in an admissible notice of intervention filed 
during the pending appeal proceedings, even if the patent proprietor does not agree to 
its introduction. 
 
TRUE - According to G1/94, intervention under Article 105 EPC in pending appeal 
proceedings may be based on any ground for opposition under Article 100 EPC. 


Question 9 
 
European patent application EP-F has been filed in French and oral proceedings have been 
scheduled before the examining division. At the beginning of the oral proceedings, the 
professional representative requests to speak in English without providing for interpretation 
into French. He also requests that the minutes be written in English and declares that he is 
aware that, if both his requests are permitted, no interpretation and translation into French will 
be provided, neither for the oral proceedings nor for the minutes. 
 
 
9.1 
The examining division may reject the request to speak English in the oral 
proceedings, even though English is an official language of the EPO. 
 
TRUE - The language of the proceedings is French, see Art. 14(3) EPC. Rule 4(1): “Any 
party to oral proceedings before the European Patent Office may use an official 
language of the European Patent Office other than the language of the proceedings, if 
such party gives notice to the European Patent Office at least one month before the 
date of such oral proceedings or provides for interpretation into the language of the 
proceedings.” 

 
 
9.2 
The examining division may agree to the request that the minutes be written in English, 
except for amendments to EP-F, which will be entered in the minutes in French. 
 
TRUE - Statements by employees of the European Patent Office, parties, witnesses or 
experts, made in an official language of the European Patent Office, shall be entered in 
the minutes in that language and amendments to a European patent application or 
European patent shall be entered in the minutes in the language of the proceedings (R. 
4(6) EPC and Guidelines E-V, 6). 
 
 
9.3 
During the oral proceedings, the representative can validly file a new amended 
set of claims in English. 
 

FALSE - Amendments to a European patent application or European patent shall be 
filed in the language of the proceedings, i.e. French (Rule 3(2) EPC). 
 
 
9.4 
If the examining division agrees, the representative may make a part of his oral 
statements during the oral proceedings in Swedish. 
 
TRUE - If the parties and the European Patent Office agree, any language may be used 
(Rule 4(4) EPC. Guidelines E-V, 2). 


Question 10 
 
Applicant B validly files an international application, PCT-B, in 2019 without claiming priority 
and elects the European Patent Office as competent International Searching Authority (ISA). 
The European Patent Office is of the opinion that PCT-B does not comply with the 
requirements of unity of invention and relates to four inventions: B1, B2, B3 and B4. In 
response to the invitation from the EPO as ISA to pay additional search fees for B2, B3 and 
B4, applicant A pays additional search fees for B2 and B3 under protest and the protest fee is 
duly paid. Four months later, applicant A receives the International Search Report. 
 
Question 10 mistakenly refers to applicant B and applicant A while it was intended to refer to 
only one applicant B different from applicant A of question 4. To avoid any disadvantage due to 
this mistake, it has been decided that for this question 10 all answers are awarded the full marks 
of 5 points. 
 
 
 
 


PART 3  
 
Question 11 
 
11.1 
Claim I-1 is limited to a glass composition which is only for use as a 
photochromic lens. 
 
FALSE – The wording “for use” in this context is equivalent to “suitable for use”. This 
means that the glass composition may be used for other purposes, but must be suitable 
for use in a photochromic lens and therefore is not only for use in a photochromic lens 
[GL 2019 F-IV, 4.13]. 
 
 
11.2 
Claim I-4 covers a glass composition for use as a photochromic lens, comprising 
silicon dioxide, sodium oxide in a content of 10% to 30% by weight of the composition, 
component M in a content of 5% to 10% by weight of the composition, and 
component X. 
 
TRUE – Claim I-4 is dependent on claim I-1 and therefore covers a glass composition 
comprising silicon dioxide, any component A (e.g. sodium oxide) in any amount, 
component M and component X (in any amount), wherein component M is present in the 
composition in 5 to 10% by weight content. Therefore, claim I-4 covers the embodiment 
of this statement, despite the missing dependency on claim I-3 which provides 
component A as being sodium oxide. 
 
 
11.3 
The protection of claim I-8 extends to the photochromic lens directly obtained by the 
process. 
 
TRUE – If the subject-matter of a patent (i.e. by virtue of the claim I-8) is a process, 
the protection conferred by the patent (or claim) shall extend to the products directly 
obtained by such process [Article 64(2) EPC]. 
 
 
11.4 
A photochromic lens which is identical to the photochromic lens of claim I-9, but which is 
not obtained by a process of claim I-8, falls under the scope of claim I-9. 
 
TRUE – The product is identical to the product of claim I-9. A product-by- process 
claim is not limited by the specified process, thus claim I-9 relates to the product per 
se [GL 2019 F-IV 4.12]. 


Question 12 
 
12.1 
Claim I-1 contains all essential features of the glass composition of the 
invention. 
 
FALSE – The amount of component M is essential, it must be about 5% to about 10% 
by weight of the class composition, see paragraph [009]. This essential feature is 
missing in claim I-1, thus claim I-1 does not contain all essential features of the glass 
composition of the invention [GL 2019 F-IV 4.5]. 
 
 
12.2 
Claim I-5 is clear. 
 
FALSE – The preferred value given as an optional feature falls outside of the broader 
range given in claim I-4. The optional feature being outside of the broader range 
introduces a lack of clarity [GL 2019 F-IV, 4.9]. It is also unclear as there is no support 
in the description [Article 84 EPC]. 
 
 
12.3 
Claim I-7 is unclear due to its dependency on claims I-1 to I-6. 
 
TRUE – Claim I-7 relates to a process, but is dependent on composition claims. 
Therefore, claim I-7 is unclear. 
 
 
12.4 
Claim I-8 is unclear due to the use of the term low. 
 
FALSE – The term “low” in feature (vi) in claim I-8 is clearly distinguished from the 
term “high” in feature (ii) of claim I-8. Furthermore, the description of the application 
defines the term “high” in paragraph [009]. Accordingly, in the context of the whole 
disclosure of the application, the term “low” is considered to be clear. 
 
In any case, if a relative term is not the only feature to distinguish the subject- matter of 
a claim from the prior art, the use of the relative term may not be objected to under 
Article 84 EPC. The word “low” is not the only feature to distinguish the claim from the 
prior art, as none of the prior art discloses the claimed process. Although broad, the 
term is not necessarily unclear [GL 2019 F-IV 4.6.1]. 


Question 13 
 
13.1 
The subject-matter of claim I-1 lacks novelty over D1. 
 
FALSE – D1 does not disclose the specific combination of a glass composition 
comprising silicon dioxide; component A; component M; and component X. Component 
A, component M and component X are disclosed in lists of certain lengths and therefore 
a selection from multiple lists must be made. Therefore, the claim is novel [GL 2019 G-
VI, 8(i)]. 
 
 
13.2 
The subject-matter of claim I-2 lacks novelty over Example 2 of D2. 
 
TRUE – D2 discloses a glass composition comprising silicon dioxide (44% by weight 
content); component A (30% by weight content); component M (6% by weight content); 
and component X (20% by weight content), see Example 2. Claim I-2 discloses a glass 
composition comprising silicon dioxide, component A in 10 to 30% by weight content, 
component M and component X. Thus, all features of claim I-2 are present in Example 
2 of D2. In particular, Example 2 in D2 discloses the end point of the range of 
component A and therefore claim I-2 lacks novelty [GL 2019 G-VI 8(iii)]. 
 
 
13.3 
The subject-matter of claim I-4 is novel over Example 3 of D2. 
 
FALSE – The specific disclosure of 7% in Example 3 of D2 anticipates the generic 
range of 5 to 10% in claim I-4. Thus, the subject-matter of claim I-4 is not novel over 
Example 3 of D2 [GL 2019 G-VI, 5]. 
 
 
13.4 
D1 discloses a component X being selected from the group consisting of 
compound alpha, compound beta and compound gamma. 
 
FALSE – D1 does not mention any of the compounds alpha, beta and gamma – a 
specific disclosure is novel over a generic one [GL 2019 G-VI-5]. 


Question 14 
 
14.1 
Claim II-1 is allowable under Article 123(2) EPC. 
 
FALSE – The removal of Component X which is an essential feature is not allowable 
under Article 123(2) EPC. Component X is an essential feature because it is required 
to provide the photochromic effect. Furthermore, the description only describes 
compositions which all contain component X, see paragraphs [006] and [013] [GL 
2019 H-V 3.1]. 
 
 
14.2 
Claim II-3 is allowable under Article 123(2) EPC. 
 
TRUE – Claim II-3 is dependent on claim II-2 which adds back the essential feature. 
The zinc oxide is a disclosed disclaimer as it is mentioned in [010] of the description of 
the application as an alternative to lime and alumina. Only one of the possible 
alternatives to the components M is disclaimed in claim II-3. Furthermore, zinc oxide is 
not described in the description of the application as being the preferred one of these 
alternatives or being specifically mentioned in an example. The removal of zinc oxide 
is a narrowing amendment, i.e. this disclaimer does not extend beyond the content of 
the application as originally filed. Thus, this disclaimer in claim II-3 is allowable (see 
also G2/10 and GL 2019 H-V, 4.2). 
 
 
14.3 
Claim II-4 is allowable under Article 123(2) EPC. 
 
TRUE – The subject-matter of claim II.4 combines the features of II.2 and II. 1 and 
corresponds to the features of originally filed claim I-2. If no error margins are specified 
in the application, the word “about” before a numerical value is ignored so that the value 
is interpreted as having the same round-off as the value itself. 
Therefore the amendment is allowable under Article 123(2) EPC [GL 2019 F-IV 4.7.1]. 
 
 
14.4 
Claim II-5 is allowable under Article 123(2) EPC. 
 
TRUE – The subject-matter of claim II.5 combines the features of II.2 and II. 1 and 
corresponds to the features of originally filed claim I-6. Claim II-5 provides a single list 
of alternatives; the deletion of a single feature from a single list of alternatives is 
allowable [GL 2019 H-V 3.3]. 


Question 15 
 
15.1 
D2 can be considered to be the closest prior art for claim III-3 because it relates to the 
same technical field, i.e. the field of photochromic lenses. 
 
TRUE – The technical field of D2 relates to a glass composition for use as a 
photochromic lens and therefore is the same as the present invention as defined claim 
III-3. D1 relates to compositions suitable for use as glass bottles. D1 makes no 
reference to photochromic lenses. D3 is not available for inventive step (Article 54(3) 
EPC) [GL G-VII 5.1 and G-VII 2]. 
 
 
15.2 
The objective technical problem to be solved by the subject-matter of claim III-1 with 
respect to D2 is the provision of a photochromic lens, the colour change of which is 
resistant to temperature changes. 
 
TRUE – D2 discloses a glass composition comprising silicon dioxide; component A 
which is present in an amount of 16% by weight content; component M which is present 
in 5 to 10% by weight content of the glass composition; and component X which is 
present in 10% by weight of the glass composition, see Example 1 of D2. The 
difference between D2 and the invention is the use of compound alpha as component 
X. D2 does not mention that component X should be resistant to temperature changes. 
The technical effect of compound alpha is that the colour change of the glass 
composition for use as a photochromic lens is resistant to temperature changes (see 
[012] of the application). This same technical effect would be observed with a 
photochromic lens made of this glass composition. Therefore, the objective technical 
problem to be solved with respect to D2 is the provision of a photochromic lens, the 
colour of which is resistant to temperature changes [GL 2019 VII 5.2]. 
 
 
15.3 
A valid argument for why the subject-matter of claim III-1 has an inventive step over D2 
is because using compound alpha as component X results in a photochromic lens, the 
colour of which is surprisingly more resistant to temperature changes than when 
compound beta or compound gamma is used. 
 
TRUE – The compound alpha results in a photochromic lens, the colour change of 
which is surprisingly resistant to temperature. Therefore, the use of compound alpha is 
likely to be considered inventive over D2 which does not disclose the compound alpha, 
but discloses alternatives which are not mentioned as being resistant to temperature 
changes [GL 2019 G-VII-10.2]. 
 
 

15.4 
A combination of D2 and D3 could be used to validly attack claim III-1 for lack of 
inventive step. 
 
FALSE – Although the combination of D2 and D3 provides all features of claim III-1, 
D3 is Article 54(3) prior art and therefore is not available for inventive step analysis [GL 
2019 G-VII 2]. 


PART 4 
 
Question 16 
 
16.1 
Claim IV.4 lacks clarity because of an incorrect dependency. 
 
FALSE - The dependency of the claims is correct, since the tablet computer and the 
receiving part are already defined in claim IV.1. 
 
 
16.2 
Claim IV.3 meets the requirements of Art. 84 EPC. 
 
FALSE - A reference to the figures is only allowed in the claims when absolutely 
necessary (see Guidelines F-IV, 4.17). The feature of a flat base is not even shown in 
Fig. 1. 
 
 
16.3 
Claim IV.7 defines that the cover part is divided along its longer dimension into three 
parallel sections that are respectively joined by parallel hinges, and which are foldable 
into a triangular prism shape. 
 
FALSE - The wording “along its longer dimension” is not defined in the claim IV.7. Thus, 
claim IV.7 does not define in which direction the cover part is divided into three parallel 
sections. 
 
 
16.4 
A protection device comprising a receiving part for receiving a tablet computer and a 
cover part having two hinges between the cover part and receiving part falls within the 
scope of claim IV.2. 
 
TRUE - Claim IV.2 does not exclude a protection device having two hinges. Claim IV.2 
defines the protection device as comprising a hinge which implies also more than one 
hinge. 


Question 17 
 
17.1 
D1 destroys the novelty of the subject-matter of claim IV.2. 
 
TRUE - The shipping packaging of D1 protects the tablet computer when the tablet 
computer is received in the shipping packaging. D1 further implicitly discloses a hinge 
between the receiving part and the flap, since the flaps of the shipping box can be 
folded over. Thus, D1 destroys the novelty of the subject- matter of claim IV.2. 
 
 
17.2 
D1 destroys the novelty of the subject-matter of claim IV.4. 
 
TRUE - D1 further discloses that the frame is made from elastic material to secure 
the tablet computer in place. Thus, D1 destroys the novelty of the subject-matter 
of claim IV.4. 
 
 
17.3 
D1 destroys the novelty of the subject-matter of claim IV.6. 
 
TRUE - D1 describes that the flap is flat and D1 specifies that the shipping 
packaging is made of rigid material. Thus, D1 destroys the novelty of the subject-
matter of claim IV.6. 
 
 
17.4 
D1 destroys the novelty of the subject-matter of claim IV.7. 
 
FALSE - D1 does not disclose a cover that is divided into three parallel sections that are 
joined by respective parallel hinges, and which are foldable into a triangular prism shape. 
Thus, D1 does not destroy the novelty of the subject- matter of claim IV.7. 


Question 18 
 
18.1 
The subject-matter of claim IV.7 is novel over D2. 
 
FALSE - In D2, the cover part is described as divided into three foldable parts forming 
a triangular prism, as clearly shown in Fig. 3 of D2. Thus, the subject- matter of claim 
IV.7 is not novel over D2. 
 
 
18.2 
The subject-matter of claim IV.6 is novel over D2. 
 
FALSE - In D2, one of the rigid and flat sections is a cover part as claimed (see 
paragraph [004] of the description of D2). Thus, the subject-matter of claim IV.6 is not 
novel over D2. 
 
 
18.3 
The subject-matter of claim IV.4 is novel over D2. 
 
FALSE - D2 describes a peripheral wall which deforms elastically for receiving and 
securing the tablet, and since the peripheral wall extends along the entire periphery (see 
paragraph [002] of the description of D2). Thus, the subject- matter of claim IV.4 is not 
novel over D2. 
 
 
18.4 
The subject-matter of claim IV.5 is novel over D2. 
 
FALSE - D2 discloses a receiving part comprising an elastically deformable means for 
securing the tablet computer in place including the four corners (par. [002] of D2). Thus, 
the subject-matter of claim IV.5 is not novel over D2. 


Question 19 
 
Under Article 123(2) EPC, there is basis for amending claim IV.1 of the originally filed application 
as follows: 
 
19.1 
Protection device comprising a receiving part for receiving a tablet computer and a cover 
part, and further comprising a hinge between the receiving part and the cover part, the 
receiving part comprising a base, the base being flat. 
 
TRUE - This amendment is based on the combination of claims IV.1, IV.2, IV.3. The 
reference to Fig. 1 is not limiting and therefore can be excluded [GL 2019 F-IV, 4.9]. 
Thus, this amendment complies with Article 123(2) EPC. 
 
 
19.2 
Protection device comprising a receiving part for receiving a tablet computer and a cover 
part, wherein the receiving part comprises a flat base and four elastically deformable 
corners for securing the tablet computer within the receiving part, and wherein the cover 
part comprises a flat and rigid section. 
 
TRUE - This amendment is based on the combination of claims IV.1, IV.3, IV.4, IV.5, IV.6. 
Thus, this amendment complies with Article 123(2) EPC. 
 
 
19.3 
Protection device comprising a receiving part for receiving a tablet computer and a cover 
part, wherein the receiving part comprises a flat base and four elastically deformable 
corners for securing the tablet computer within the receiving part, and wherein the cover 
part is flat. 
 
FALSE - This claim covers a cover being flat without the further limitation to comprise a 
rigid section as defined in claim IV.6. For example, this means that the cover can be flat 
and fully flexible, which is not disclosed. Thus, this amendment constitutes an 
intermediate generalisation [GL 2019 H V-3.2.1]. 
Whilst all embodiments describe cover parts being at least partially flat and rigid, the 
second embodiment having rigid sections is not fully flexible. Thus, the application does 
not disclose a flat cover being fully flexible. This means that there is no basis for 
amending claim IV.1 in this manner and this amendment does not comply with Article 
123(2) EPC. 
 
 
19.4 
Protection device comprising a receiving part for receiving a tablet computer and a cover 
part, wherein the cover part is divided into three parallel sections that are respectively 
joined by parallel hinges, and is foldable into a triangular prism shape, each section being 
flat and rigid, and wherein the hinges and the sections are made from the same material 
such that the hinges are formed by folds of the cover part. 
 
TRUE - This amendment is based on the combination of IV.1, IV.7 and [005] of the 
description of the application. The invention is defined in paragraph [003] of the 
description of the application to have the receiving part being a flat base and having four 
elastically deformable corners. Thus, this receiving part applies to all embodiments of the 
invention. Therefore, it is not necessary to include the flat base and the four elastically 
deformable corners in the claim. Thus, this amendment complies with Article 123(2) EPC. 


Question 20 
 
V.1  Protection device comprising a receiving part for receiving a tablet computer and a cover 
part, wherein the receiving part comprises a flat and rigid plastic base and four corners for 
securing the tablet computer within the receiving part, characterised in that the four corners are 
elastically deformable and the 
four corners extend from the peripheral edge of the base and the four corners are made of 
silicone having a greater thickness than the base. 
 
 
20.1 
Claim V.1 is in the correct two-part form with respect to the disclosure of D2. 
 
FALSE - D2 discloses a receiving part comprising a flat base and a peripheral wall that 
deform elastically. Thus, the peripheral wall comprises four elastically deformable corners 
extending from the flat base. These features should be placed in the preamble and not in 
the characterising portion of claim V.1. 
Furthermore, D2 does not disclose a flat and rigid base portion and therefore should be 
in the characterising portion of claim V.1 [Rule 43(1) EPC]. Thus, claim V.1 is not in the 
correct two part form with respect to the disclosure of D2. 
 
 
20.2 
A valid argument as to why D2 may be considered the closest prior art is that it 
discloses a base made from the same material as the corners. 
 
FALSE- D2 has a base that is made from the same material as the corners of the 
peripheral wall, but this argument is not relevant since it is not a feature of the claim 
V.1. Thus, this argument is not a valid one. 
 
 
20.3 
A possible technical effect of the invention defined in claim V.1 with respect to D2 is 
that it allows better protection of the screen of the tablet computer. 
 
FALSE - D2 teaches that the thickness can be increased uniformly for better protection 
of the screen (paragraph [003] of the description of D2). The advantage of the present 
invention with respect to D2 is that it uses less silicone material overall. The protection 
is actually slightly decreased by the protection device of claim V.1 (paragraph [003] of 
the description of the application). Thus, the invention defined in claim V.1 does not 
provide better protection of the screen of the tablet computer with respect to D2. Thus, 
this is not a possible technical effect of the invention defined in claim V.1. 

 
 
20.4 
For the purpose of assessing inventive step of claim V.1, a valid argument is that D1 
does not relate to the technical field of protection devices. 
 
FALSE - Although D1 describes shipping packaging, the purpose of the packaging it to 
protect the tablet computer and thus belongs to the technical field of a protection 
device for a tablet computer as with D2. Therefore, it is a valid argument to use D1 in 
assessing inventive step of claim V.1. 


