Part 1 

Question 1 

 

Francesca has filed a European patent application EP-F before the EPO. Francesca did 

not develop the invention which is the subject of EP-F. In drafting EP-F Francesca used 

information in Andrew’s laboratory notebook, without Andrew’s consent. EP-F was 

published in December 2017 and is still pending. 

 

 

1.1 
Andrew can seek a stay of proceedings if he provides evidence that he has 

instituted proceedings against Francesca seeking a decision that Andrew is 

entitled to the grant of the European patent based on EP-F. 

TRUE: Andrew can seek a stay of proceedings if Andrew proves that he has instituted 

proceedings against Francesca seeking a decision that Andrew is entitled to the grant of 

the European patent based on EP-F, Article 61(1) EPC and Rule 14(1) EPC. 

 

1.2 
Francesca can withdraw EP-F at any time from the date on which Andrew 

provides evidence to the EPO that he has instituted proceedings against 

Francesca seeking a decision that Andrew is entitled to the grant of the European 

patent based on  

EP-F. 

FALSE: From that date and up to the date on which the proceedings for grant are 

resumed, neither the European patent application nor the designation of any Contracting 

State may be withdrawn, Article 61(1) EPC and Rule 15 EPC. 

 

1.3 
No renewal fee has to be paid during a stay of proceedings. 

FALSE: All periods other than those for the payment of renewal fees, running at the 

date of the stay of proceedings, shall be interrupted by such stay, Rule 14(4) EPC and 

Guidelines A-IV, 2.2.4: hence renewal fees must be paid even during such stay. 

 

1.4 
Andrew can validly request that EP-F be refused no later than three months after 

the decision recognising his entitlement to EP-F has become final. 


TRUE: Andrew has three months after the decision recognising his entitlement has 

become final for requesting that the European patent application filed by Francesca is 

refused, Article 61(1)(c) EPC and Rule 16 (1) EPC. 

 
 


Question 2 

 

Hans filed an admissible notice of opposition against European patent EP-1, which was 

granted with two independent claims, namely claim 1 and claim 2 relating respectively to 

two different parts of the patent. The only ground for opposition that he raised was lack 

of inventive step in respect of claim 1. The opposition is not filed against the patent as a 

whole, but only against claim 1. In particular, he argued in the notice of opposition that 

the subject-matter of claim 1 lacked inventive step over the combination of D1 and D2, 

both published before the effective date of EP-1. Theresa filed third-party observations 

during the pending opposition proceedings, arguing that claim 2 lacked novelty over D3, 

a Japanese patent application published before the effective date of EP-1. 

 

For the following statements, assume that the right to be heard of all parties involved 

has been respected and no amendments have been filed during the opposition 

proceedings. 

 

 

2.1 
If the opposition division considers that the subject-matter of claim 1 lacks novelty 

over D1, the opposition division may revoke EP-1 for lack of novelty of the 

subject-matter of claim 1. 

True: Novelty and inventive step are separate grounds for opposition. However, 

novelty as a new ground may be considered in view of the same document used 

for deciding upon the ground of lack of inventive step (Article 114(1) EPC, Rule 

81(1) EPC, G7/95). 

 

2.2 
If the opposition division considers that the subject-matter of claim 2 lacks 

inventive step over D2 in combination with D3, the opposition division may revoke 

EP-1 for lack of inventive step of the subject-matter of claim 2 over D2 in 

combination with D3. 

False: The extent of the opposition defines the competence of the opposition 

division. Subject-matter of a claim not covered by the extent of the opposition may 

not be subject of the opposition (G9/91). 

 

2.3 
If the opposition division considers that the subject-matter of claim 1 is not 

sufficiently disclosed, the opposition division may revoke EP-1 because the 


subject-matter of claim 1 is not disclosed in a manner sufficiently clear and 

complete for it to be carried out by a person skilled in the art. 

True: The opposition division may of its own motion raise a ground for opposition 

within the extent of the opposition (Article 114(1) EPC, Rule 81(1) EPC, G10/91, 

reason 16). 

 

 

2.4 
After the opposition division has considered Theresa’s third-party observations, 

the opposition division may revoke EP-1 based on lack of novelty of the subject-

matter of claim 2. 

False: The competence of the opposition division is limited to independent claim 

1 (G9/91). Only subject- matters of claims depending on an independent claim, 

which falls in opposition proceedings, may be examined as to their patentability 

even if they have not been explicitly opposed (G9/91). This means that the 

independent claim 2 is not within the competence of the opposition division and 

can not be examined by it. Furthermore, third parties are not party to the 

opposition proceedings.


 

Question 3 

 

A board of appeal … 

 

3.1 
… may decide in a three-member composition without a legally qualified member. 

FALSE: The board of appeal requires the presence of at least one legally qualified 

member (Article 21(2), (3) and (4) EPC). 

 

3.2 
… may exercise any power within the competence of the department which was 

responsible for the decision appealed. 

TRUE: The board of appeal may either exercise any power within the competence of the 

department which was responsible for the decision appealed or remit the case to 

that department for further prosecution (Article 111(1) EPC). 

 

3.3 
… may remit a case to the department which was responsible for the decision 

appealed for further prosecution. 

TRUE: The board of appeal may remit the case to that department for further 

prosecution in accordance to Article 111(1) EPC. 

 

3.4 
... may base its decision on a fresh ground for opposition only submitted during 

the appeal proceedings without the consent of the patentee. 

FALSE: The board of appeal can not base their decision on a fresh ground for 

opposition during appeal proceedings without consent of the patentee (G10/91). 

 

 

 


 

Question 4 

  

Company A has filed a European patent application EP-A with the EPO. Company B has 

negotiated with Company A the transfer of European patent application EP-A to 

Company B. 

 

4.1 
It is possible to validly transfer EP-A from Company A to Company B only for the 

designated contracting states FR and DE. 

TRUE: According to Article 71 EPC, a European patent application can be 

transferred for one or more designated Contracting States (two or more 

applicants may be designated for different Contracting States, see also Article 59 

EPC). 

 

4.2 
The transfer of EP-A may be recorded in the European Patent Register at the 

request of Company B, upon production of documents providing evidence of such 

transfer and payment of an administration fee. 

TRUE: For recording the transfer of right, Rule 143(1)(w) EPC, the EPO requires the 

submission of a request by an interested party, e.g. Company B, the payment of 

an administrative fee (Rule 22(2) EPC and also evidence of such transfer, Rule 

22(1) EPC (e.g. an assignment, Article 72 EPC, which requires the signature of 

both parties to be effective). 

 

4.3 
The transfer of a European patent application becomes effective vis-à-vis the 

EPO only when it is published in the European Patent Register. 

FALSE: The transfer is effective vis-à-vis the EPO as soon as the documents according 

to Rule 22(1) EPC have been produced, Rule 22(3) EPC. 

 

4.4 
The transfer of a European patent may be recorded in the European Patent 

Register during the opposition period. 

TRUE: A European patent can validly be transferred and the transfer can be 

recorded in the European Patent Register even during opposition period or during 

opposition proceedings, Rule 85 EPC in conjunction with Rule 22 EPC. 

 

 


 

Question 5 

 

Roberto and Mario are Brazilian citizens living in São Paolo, Brazil. They are the 

applicants for European patent application EP1, which has been filed today in 

Portuguese together with a French translation. EP1 claims the priority of a previous 

Brazilian application P1. 

 

For each of the statements 5.1–5.4, indicate on the answer sheet whether the statement 

is true or false: 

 

5.1 
Roberto and Mario are entitled to a reduction of the filing fee. 

False: Roberto and Mario are not entitled to a reduction of the filing fee. Roberto and 

Mario do not have their place of residence or place of business within a 

contracting state and are not nationals of a contracting state being resident 

abroad (Article 14(4) EPC, R. 6(3) EPC). 

 

5.2 
EP1 will be accorded by the EPO a filing date, only if the content of EP1 does not 

extend beyond the content of P1 as originally filed. 

False: EP1 can contain additional subject-matter which is not included in P1 (Article 80 

EPC, Rule 40 EPC). In that case, the right to priority shall, however, cover only 

the subject-matter of EP1 which is included in P1 (Article 88(3) EPC). 

 

5.3 
If the French translation had not been filed in due time, EP1 would be deemed not 

to have been filed. 

False: The legal consequence is that EP1 is considered to be withdrawn (Article 14(2) 

EPC, last sentence), and not that it is deemed not to have been filed. 

 

5.4 
If EP1 is assigned to a British company, the language of the proceedings may be 

changed to English after registration of the transfer. 

False: The language of the proceedings cannot be changed during the proceedings 

concerning an application, because this is not provided for in the EPC (G4/08). 

 

 


 

Part 2 

Question 6 

 

Roberto and Mario are Brazilian citizens living in São Paolo, Brazil. They are the 

applicants for European patent application EP1, which has been filed today in 

Portuguese together with a French translation. EP1 claims the priority of a previous 

Brazilian application P1 Assuming now that Roberto and Mario intend to file a divisional 

application EP1-DIV relating to the pending patent application EP1, indicate whether the 

following statements are true or false. 

 

6.1  
EP1-DIV may be validly filed with the EPO at the filing offices in Munich, The 

Hague and Vienna. 

False: Rule 36(2) EPC, last sentence mentions the EPO in Munich, The Hague or Berlin 

as places where to validly file a divisional application, but not Vienna. 

 

6.2 
EP1-DIV may be validly filed in Portuguese. 

True: Rule 36(2) EPC, second sentence states that if the earlier application was not in 

an official language of the EPO, the divisional application can be filed in the 

language of the earlier application, i.e. in the present case in Portuguese, 

 

6.3 
EP1-DIV may be validly filed in English. 

False: Rule 36(2) EPC, first sentence only allows the divisional application to be filed in 

the language of the proceedings for the earlier application, i.e. in the present case 

in French, but not English. 

 

6.4 
EP1-DIV must be filed within 12 months from the filing date of EP1. 

False: There is no time limit for filing a divisional application other than the requirement 

that the parent application must be pending (Article 76 EPC and Rule 36(1) EPC). 

 

 


 

Question 7  

 

The dimethyl fumarate molecule (DMF) is known from the prior art in the following 

respects: 

Document D1 discloses DMF as a biocide for the treatment of clothing, shoes and 

furniture against mould growth. 

Document D2 concerns a patent which discloses DMF for the treatment of the skin 

disease psoriasis and of multiple sclerosis.  

The prior art does not disclose any further disease that can be treated with DMF. 

 

7.1  
The subject-matter of the claim “DMF for use as a medicament” in a European 

patent application filed today is novel over the above-mentioned prior art. 

False: A first medical use of DMF cannot be claimed, since DMF is already known as 

medicament. 

 

7.2  
The subject-matter of the claim “DMF for use in the treatment of cancer” in a 

European patent application filed today is novel over the above-mentioned prior 

art. 

True: The second medical use of DMF is new over the prior art documents mentioned 

above, since DMF is not known as a medicament for the treatment of cancer. 

Guidelines G-VI. 7.1 

 

7.3  
The following claim wording is allowable in a European patent application filed 

today: “Use of DMF for the manufacture of a medicament for the treatment of 

cancer”. 

False: The so-called Swiss-type claims are not allowed in applications having an 

effective date of 29.01.2011 or later (G2/08). Guidelines G-VI, 7.1 

 

7.4  
The subject-matter of the claim “DMF for use in the treatment of skin diseases” in 

a European patent application filed today is novel over the above-mentioned prior 

art. 

False: DMF is already known for the treatment of psoriasis (a skin disease). 

 

 


 

Question 8 

 

Jan, a national and resident of the USA, filed an international application PCT-J with the 

USPTO on 10 January 2022. On filing, Jan indicated the EPO as one of the designated 

Offices. The EPO was immediately informed of its designation. 

The USPTO charges the late payment fee for a delayed payment of the international 

filing fee as allowed under the PCT.  

 

8.1 
Jan must pay the international filing fee to the International Bureau. 

FALSE: 
For international application the fees have to be paid to the receiving Of-
fice, not to the International Bureau (Rule 15.1 PCT). 

 

8.2 
If the international filing fee is not paid in due time, Jan can validly pay the 

international filing fee together with the late payment fee within a time limit of one 

month from the date of the invitation sent by the receiving Office. 

TRUE: If the filing fee is not paid in due time, then Jan can validly pay the filing fee with 

a late payment fee within a time limit of one month from the date of the invitation 

sent by the receiving Office (Rule 16bis.1 (a) PCT and Rule 16bis.2 PCT. 

 

8.3 
A consequence of not paying the international filing fee with the late payment fee 

within the prescribed time limit is that the USPTO will declare that PCT-J is 

considered to be withdrawn. 

TRUE: If the USPTO concludes that it did not receive the international filing fee with the 

late payment fee within the time limit, the USPTO will issue a declaration that 

PCT-J shall be considered withdrawn, Rule 16bis.1 (c) PCT and 

Article 14(3)(a) PCT. 

 

8.4 
A consequence of not paying the international filing fee with the late payment fee 

within the prescribed time limit is that the USPTO will notify the EPO as the 

designated Office that PCT-J is considered to be withdrawn. 

FALSE: 
It is the International Bureau that informs the designated offices of a 

declaration of withdrawal of the application and not the receiving Office 

(Rule 29.1 (ii) PCT).


 

Question 9 

 

9.1 
The EPO will accord a date of filing to a European patent application filed by an 

identifiable applicant using EPO Form 1001, even if the description is filed in 

Chinese. 

TRUE: 
The date of filing is accorded irrespective of the language of the application 

documents, provided that the requirements of Rule 40(1)(a) to (c) EPC are 

complied with. It is not required to file the description in any particular 

language (Article 14(2) EPC). 

 

9.2 
If a request for grant is not filed on a form drawn up by the EPO, an application 

filed together with that request will not be dealt with as a European patent 

application. 

FALSE: 
According to Rule 41(1) EPC, the request for grant must be filed on a form 

drawn up by the EPO. If the request for grant does not satisfy the 

requirements of Rule 41 EPC, then the applicant is invited to correct the 

deficiency within two months from notification. This is done after the 

European application has been accorded a date of filing (Rule 57 (b) EPC, 

Rule 58 EPC, Article 90 (3) to (5) EPC). 

 

9.3 
If an international application contains no part which on the face of it appears to 

be a claim or claims, a date of filing will not be accorded to that international 

application. 

TRUE: 
According to Article 11(1)(iii)(e) PCT, a part, which is on the face of it 

appears to be a claim or claims,is required for obtaining a filing date for an 

international application. 

 

9.4 
A Japanese citizen resident in Japan may validly file a European patent 

application without being represented by a professional representative. 

TRUE: 
According to Article 133(2) EPC, natural or legal persons not having their 

residence or principal place of business in a Contracting State shall be 

represented by a professional representative and act through him in all 

proceedings established by this Convention, other than in filing a European 


 

patent application. So filing of a European patent application can be done without 

requiring a professional representative. 


 

Question 10 

 

A communication pursuant to Rule 71(3) EPC has been issued for a European patent 

application. The applicant has fulfilled all the necessary requirements. The related 

decision to grant a European patent has been despatched on the basis of the 

documents (Druckexemplar) transmitted to the applicant with the communication under 

Rule 71(3) EPC. The mention of the grant of the European patent has been published in 

the European Patent Bulletin. 

 

However, in the course of the preparation of the publication of the specification of this 

European patent an error arose, whereby page 2 of the description is missing in the 

published specification of this European patent. As a result of this error, the published 

specification of this European patent as a whole does not disclose the claimed invention 

in a manner sufficiently clear and complete for it to be carried out by a person skilled in 

the art. 

 

10.1 This error in the published specification of this European patent may be corrected 

at any time. 

True: Errors in publication occur where the content of the printed specification differs 

from the documents transmitted to the applicant with the communication under 

Rule 71(3) EPC, which form the basis of the decision to grant. Errors of this kind 

can be corrected at any time (Guidelines C-V,10 and H-VI,6). 

 

10.2 The European patent could be revoked on the basis of an opposition based on 

the ground of Art. 100(b) EPC because in the published specification of this 

European patent the invention without page 2 of the description is not disclosed in 

a manner sufficiently clear and complete for it to be carried out by a person skilled 

in the art. 

False: Mistakes in the specification of a European patent arising in the course of its 

production (such as printing of the B publication) have no effect on the patent 

granted (Guidelines C-V, 10 and H-VI,6). The decisive text is the text forming the 

basis of the decision of the grant. 

 

 


 

10.3 If the language of the grant proceedings for this European patent was English, a 

notice of opposition may be validly filed in German. 

True: In written proceedings before the EPO, any party may use any official language 

(Rule 3(1) EPC, first sentence). 

 

10.4 To transfer the status of opponent to a different person during opposition 

proceedings, it is sufficient to file a declaration including the names, addresses 

and signatures of both the original opponent and the person wishing to take over 

the status of opponent. 

False: Oppositions are not transferrable, but may be inherited or succeeded to as part of 

an overall succession in law (Guidelines D-I, 4, G4/88, G2/04)


 

Part 3 

Remark: There is a translation error in the German version [005] of the descrip-

tion, second line. It should read Poly-Y and not Poly-X. 

 
Due to this translation error the Examination Board decided to award 

full marks to all candidates for questions 11 to 15. 

 

 

 

Question 11 

 

11.1 A yoga mat consisting of poly-X is covered by the scope of claim 7. 

FALSE: If the mat consists of poly-X, poly-X is the only material. However, claim 7 re-

quires the presence of an antibacterial material and Poly-X is not described as 

antibacterial. 

 

11.2 The material of claim 5 is defined by means of a functional feature. 

TRUE: The material of claim 5 is defined in terms of its function, i.e. as a functional fea-

ture, rather than by using a structural definition, Guidelines, F-IV, 6.5. 

 

11.3 The features of claim 11 imply a limitation of the dimensions of the textile bag 

TRUE: A textile container for completely covering and for transporting a yoga mat re-

quires certain minimum dimensions (Guidelines F-IV, 4.14.2). The dimensions of 

a yoga mat are mentioned in [001] of the description. For example, a textile case, 

which cannot be extended to one of the dimensions of a yoga mat mentioned in 

[001] of the description, would not be covered by claim11.  

 

11.4 The subject-matter of claim 13 lacks clarity. 

TRUE: The expression “grows relatively slowly” is a relative expression without a gener-

ally recognised meaning, Guidelines F-IV, 4.6. 

 

 

 

 

 


 

Question 12 

 

12.1 The subject-matter of claim 2 is novel over D3. 

FALSE: The yoga mat of D3 has two distinguishable faces, one side bearing a name 

and the other side not bearing a name.  

 

12.2 A valid argument that the subject-matter of claim 4 is novel over D3 is that in D3 

the first face is the face that is in contact with the athlete. 

FALSE: The fact that a different “numbering” or labelling of the faces is used in D3 does 

not bring about any technical distinguishing feature. Claim 1 from which present 

claim 4 depends does not include any other technical feature that would further 

be characterized by the “first” face and the “second” face. 

 

12.3  A valid argument that the subject-matter of claim 6 is novel over D2 is that in D2 

the yoga mat is only partially coated with a layer of poly-X. 

FALSE: Claim 6 does not specify that the coating is full or completely covering the face 

– this is also confirmed by claim 9 and the description paragraph [003]. 

 

12.4 The subject-matter of claim 8 is novel over each of D1, D2, D3 and D4. 

TRUE: Yoga mats, wherein at least one face contains silver ions, are not disclosed in 

any of the documents D1 to D4. 

 

 


 

Question 13 

Claim 10 specifies that the material of the second face reduces the generation of sweat 

on the athlete’s body. This functional feature is clear from reading the claim per 

se. Poly-Y is not a limiting feature of claim 10. Accordingly the translation error in 

the German version of the paper does not impact interpretation of claim 10. 

13.1 The subject-matter of claim 10 is novel over D1. 

FALSE: A yoga mat having a first face and a second face, wherein the yoga mat is en-

tirely made of poly-Y is disclosed in D1. A different use of one and the same ma-

terial (“wherein the material is such that upon contact with the athlete’s body it re-

duces the generation of sweat in the athlete’s body”) does not render the product 

novel, see Guidelines, F-IV, 4.13). 

 

13.2 The subject-matter of claim 10 is novel over D2. 

FALSE: A yoga mat having a first face and a second face, wherein one face contains a 

material wherein the material is such that upon contact with the athlete’s body it 

reduces the generation of sweat in the athlete’s body is disclosed in D2. The ma-

terial poly-Z is suited to reduce the generation of sweat in the athlete’s body, as 

can be confirmed from the present application, see paragraph [005], penultimate 

sentence). 

 

13.3 The present application indicates that a yoga mat made of poly-Y is more effec-

tive than a yoga mat made of poly-X or poly-Z in reducing sweat generation on 

the body of the athlete while the athlete is in contact with the yoga mat. 

TRUE: The advantages of poly-Y are disclosed in the fourth embodiment of the inven-

tion, see paragraph [005], penultimate sentence, in which the SVR of Poly-Y is 

higher (i.e. better) than that of both Poly-X and Poly-Z. 

 

13.4 The subject-matter of claim 13 is novel over D2. 

TRUE: D2 does not disclose a textile container containing a yoga mat. 

 

 


 

Question 14 

 

14.1 A modified single claim 1 which reads “Yoga mat having a first face and a second 

face, wherein the yoga mat has an SRV of 90 or more.” would be allowable under 

Article 123(2) EPC. 

TRUE: The modified claim is directly and unambiguously derivable from the combination 

of the subject-matter of claim 1 with the last sentence of paragraph [005]. 

 

14.2 A modified single claim 1 which reads “Yoga mat having a first face and a second 

face, wherein the yoga mat has an SRV of 90 or more.” would be clear under Arti-

cle 84 EPC. 

FALSE: The SRV is established according to a “new, special test protocol”. Thus, it ap-

pears that the test protocol does not relate to a parameter generally known in the 

art. According to Guidelines, F-IV 4.11, “Cases in which unusual parameters are 

employed or a non-accessible apparatus for measuring the parameter(s) is used 

are prima facie objectionable on grounds of lack of clarity, as no meaningful com-

parison with the prior art can be made.  

 

14.3 A modified single claim 1 which reads “Yoga mat having a first face and a second 

face, wherein the first face has a coating of poly-X, the poly-X covering 100% of 

the first face.” would be allowable under Article 123(2) EPC. 

TRUE: This amended claim is based on claims 1, 4, 5, 6 and 9 as filed. Claim 6 de-

pends on claim 5 so it is inherent that Poly-X is the material providing secure but 

reversible adhesion of the mat onto the floor (see also [003] of the description). 

The 100% corresponds to the end of the range defined in claim 9.. 

 

14.4 A modified single claim 1 which reads “Yoga mat having a first face and a second 

face, wherein the first face and the second face contain silver ions.” would be al-

lowable under Article 123(2) EPC. 

FALSE: Whereas the application discloses in paragraph [004] that the yoga mat con-

tains antibacterial material, such as silver ions and that the antibacterial material 

may be present only on the second face, this does not necessarily mean that the 

antibacterial material, or the silver ions, will be present on the first face. The sen-

tence “The antibacterial material may be present only on the second face.” could 


 

simply mean that the silver ions may only be found on the second face and within 

the mat (but only a few millimetres below the second face). There is no clear and 

unambiguous disclosure of silver ions onto the first face. 

 
Furthermore, there is no disclosure of an antibacterial material on both faces. 

 

 


 

Question 15 

 

15.1 In D2 and in the present application the material poly-X has essentially the same 

purpose. 

TRUE: The material poly-X provides according to the present application (see paragraph 

[003]) secure but reversible adhesion of the yoga mat onto the floor.  The teach-

ing of D2 is that poly-X provides a strong adhesion of the yoga mat onto the floor 

while the athlete performs exercises and that after use, the mat can be easily re-

moved from the floor. Both applications discuss essentially the same property of 

poly-X and consequently the same use. 

 

 

15.2 The additional features defined in claim 8, whereby the second face of the yoga 

mat contains silver ions, has the technical effect of reducing bacteria growth. 

TRUE: The silver ions comprised in the yoga mat of this claim have an antibacterial ef-

fect, see paragraph [004]. 

 

15.3 The subject-matter of claim 13 solves the objective technical problem of providing 

an organic, sustainable yoga mat with respect to D1 as closest prior art. 

FALSE: Claim 13 does not define an organic, sustainable yoga mat. 

 

15.4 The subject-matter of claim 14 is novel over D1. 

FALSE: D1 discloses a yoga mat made entirely of poly-Y. This means that in D1 poly-Y 

is used to produce yoga mats. Thus, the use of poly-Y in the production of yoga 

mats is not new over D1. 

 

 

 


 

Part 4 

Question 16 

 

16.1 D13 destroys the novelty of the subject-matter of claim II.1. 

False: D13 only discloses a method for preserving liquids, but does not mention wine. 

 

16.2 D12 destroys the novelty of the subject-matter of claim II.1. 

TRUE: In D12 air is also pushed out of the bottle's headspace by the addition of carbon 

dioxide. 

 

16.3 D11 destroys the novelty of the subject-matter of claim II.2. 

TRUE: In D11 air and therefore also oxygen from within the bottle are evacuated thus 

reducing the amount of oxygen in the headspace. 

 

16.4 D12 destroys the novelty of the subject-matter of claim II.2 

TRUE: In D12 the addition of carbon dioxide pushes air and therefore also oxygen out of 

the bottle thus reducing the amount of oxygen in the headspace. 

 
 


 

Question 17 

 

17.1 D11 destroys the novelty of the subject-matter of claim II.3. 

False: D11 does not disclose a method wherein an inert gas is introduced into the head-

space of the bottle. 

 

17.2 D12 describes that wine can have a chemical reaction with a gas. 

TRUE: In D12 it is described that a reaction occurs when carbon dioxide is added to wa-

ter. D12 describes a similar reaction when carbon dioxide is added into the wine, 

in order to improve the wine’s properties and to preserve the wine.  

 

17.3 D12 destroys the novelty of the subject-matter of claim II.4. 

False: D12 discloses to inject carbon dioxide into the wine, and not directly into the 

headspace as required by claim II.3, from which II.4 depends. 

 

17.4 D13 destroys the novelty of the subject-matter of claim II.5. 

True: D13 discloses in paragraphs [002] and [003] a method for preserving an alcoholic 

beverage (beer) wherein the concentration of oxygen in the headspace of the bot-

tle is reduced, wherein an inert gas is introduced into the headspace of the bottle, 

and wherein the inert gas is only nitrogen. 

 
 


 

Question 18 

 

18.1 The EPO may issue a communication under Rule 62a EPC in the search phase 

for the present set of claims. 

TRUE: Yes, claim II.1 and claim II.2 are independent method claims and relate to alter-

native subject-matter, i.e. Rule 62a EPC applies. 

 

18.2 The subject-matter of claim II.5 is clear. 

FALSE: Claim II.5 is unclear since on the one hand the inert gas is specified as being 

only nitrogen, but on the other hand claim II.5 is dependent on claim II.4 wherein 

the inert gas is carbon dioxide. 

 

18.3 The presence of an inert gas is described in the application documents as an es-

sential feature. 

FALSE: The presence of an inert gas is only a preferred feature and not an essential 

feature (see paragraph [003] of the description). 

 

18.4 The subject-matter of claim II.6 can be introduced into the description without 

contravening Article 123(2) EPC. 

TRUE: The subject-matter of claim II.6 is part of the application as filed and can be 

added to the description without contravening Article 123(2) EPC. 

 

 


 

Question 19 

 

19.1 Amending claim II.7 to recite “Method for preserving an alcoholic beverage ac-

cording to claim II.3, wherein the inert gas is a noble gas” would not be allowable 

under Article 123(2) EPC. 

TRUE: There is no reference to a noble gas in the application. As such claim 6 cannot 

be directed to noble gases without contravening Article 123(2) EPC. 

 

19.2 Although argon is described as the most preferred inert gas, deleting all refer-

ences to argon from the claims would be allowable under Article 123(2) EPC. 

TRUE: Deletion of a preferred option does not add subject-matter, in particular if the de-

scription shows other ways to achieve the claimed subject-matter.  

 

19.3 Amending claim II.3 to recite “Method for preserving an alcoholic beverage ac-

cording to claim II.2, wherein an inert gas is directly injected into the headspace of 

the bottle to create a gas cap on top of the wine level” would be allowable under 

Article 123(2) EPC. 

False: The amendment in claim 3 is an intermediate generalisation, since the gas cap is 

disclosed only for argon, and not for all other inert gases. 

 

19.4 Amending claim II.2 to recite “Method for preserving an alcoholic beverage having 

10 vol.% alcohol or more, wherein the amount of oxygen in the headspace of the 

bottle is reduced” would be allowable under Article 123 (2) EPC. 

TRUE: The amendment in claim 2 “including 10 vol% alcohol or more” is based on para-

graph [001] of the present application. Although the amended claim II.2 omits the 

expression “in the bottle”, this does not violate the requirements of Article 123(2) 

EPC. Amended claim II.2 still references a bottle in the second part of this claim 

with reference to its headspace. 

 


 

Question 20 

 

 
Since the following sentence was missing on WiseFlow: 

 

“Assume in the following that inventive step has to be assessed in respect of claim II.9.” 

 

 
the Examination Board decided to award full marks to all candidates for 

question 20. 

 

20.1 One valid argument as to why D11 is not the closest prior art is that D11 does not 

require the addition of gas. 

TRUE: A valid argument as to why D11 is not the closest prior art, is that it works ac-

cording to a different principle (extraction of air) contrary to the invention (addition 

of gas). 

 

20.2 If D12 is selected as the closest prior art, a possible objective technical problem 

can be formulated as how to preserve an alcoholic beverage by injecting an inert 

gas directly into the headspace of the bottle. 

FALSE: An inert gas being injected directly into the headspace of the bottle is the solu-

tion in order to preserve the alcoholic beverage. The solution must not be used for 

the formulation of the objective technical problem (Guidelines G-VII, 5.2). 

 

20.3 One valid argument as to why D13 is not the closest prior art is that D13 deals 

only with the preservation of fish oil. 

FALSE: D13 does not only relate to preserving of fish oil, but also to “beer”, see para-

graph [003] of D13. 

 

20.4 Assuming that D13 is considered to be the closest prior art, an objective technical 

problem to be solved may be regarded as how to reduce the amount of gas re-

quired to remove air from above the wine level. 

TRUE: This technical problem is derivable from the last sentence of [004] of the descrip-

tion of the application (stating that “a very small amount of argon gas is sufficient 

to create the gas cap and prevent the oxidation process”). In contrast thereto, 

[002] of the description of D13 states that a volume of nitrogen gas equal to 20 


 

times of the volume of the headspace is needed to expel all oxygen gas from the 

headspace. 


