 
 

- 6 - 

Candidate’s Answer – DII 
 
1. 
HVHF plugs 

 
 
 
 
 
 
∆ + □  
∆ 

 
PP has: 
US2 - granted in US (related to US 1) 

 
 
 
EP1 - pending before EPO ∆ + □ + ⌂ for all states 

 
 
LBP has: 
FR1 - ∆ France - still pending? 

 
 
 
EP2 - granted for DE, ES, FR, GB ∆ + □ 

 
 
PP has granted US patent US2 which provides PP with patent protection for 
HVHF plugs with triangular and square cross-sections in the US. 

 
 
EP1 was sent by registered letter on 29.10.02. In order to claim priority validly 
from US2, EP1 had to be filed during a period of twelve months from the date of 
filing the first application, ie by 1.11.02 (Friday), 1.11.02 was holiday in Munich 
branch of EPO so under R 85(1) EPC, due date for claiming priority was 
extended to Monday 4.11.02. EP 1 was not received at EPO until 8.11.02, ie after 
the due date. But R 48a EPC provides that where a document is received late at 
the EPO it is deemed to have been received in time if it was posted in due time 
before the expiry of the time limit. Dec. of Pres. OJ 1999, 45 and E - VIII, 1.7 sets 
out that document must be posted at least 5 days before due date and it can be 
sent by registered letter or recognised delivery service and if from outside Europe 
by air mail. Here, EP1 was posted 6 days prior to due date by registered letter 
and from inside Europe. Therefore, EP 1 is deemed received in due time to claim 
priority from US2. However EP 1 may only claim priority in respect of the same 
invention as in US2, which is the first application and in the preceding 12 months. 

 
 
“Same invention” (G 2/98) means that the specific combination of features in the 
claims of EP1 must be disclosed in the first application as a whole either explicitly 
or implicitly. For the claims to the plug with square contacts, EP1 can validly claim 
priority from US2, since the first application by the same applicant in which this 
subject matter was disclosed was US2. However, for claims of EP1 relating to ∆ 
contacts, US2 was not the first application in the sense of A 87(1) EPC. The 
subject matter of the triangular contacts was disclosed in a still earlier application 
(US1) originating from PP, so the priority right for the plugs with triangular 
contacts is invalid in so far as this was already described in US1 since the A 87(4) 
EPC exception doesn’t apply in this case (cascading priority problem here), ie 
although the previous (US1) and subsequent (US2) applications were filed in the 
same state (USA), at the filing date of US2, US1 had not been withdrawn, 
abandoned or refused (as it was withdrawn after US2 filing date) and it had left 
rights outstanding (in that US2 is a C-I-P of US1). Therefore, the 3 areas of 
subject matter of EP1 do not have the same effective date (A 89 EPC). 

 

- 
Square contacts - entitled to priority date (ie filing date of US2) of 1.11.01. 

 
- 
Triangular contacts and new pentagon contacts entitled to filing date only. 

 

The date on which all the requirements for a filing date were met (A 80 EPC) was 
8.11.02. 


 

 
R 84a EPC does not apply to filing date itself as was no “due date” missed. 
So, effective date for ∆ and ⌂ contacts subject matter is 08.11.02. 
 
EP2 claims priority from FR1. FR1 discloses plugs with triangular contacts only. 
EP2 validly claims priority from FR1 since they have same applicants (LBP) and 
EP2 was filed within 12 months of FR1’s filing date, but only in respect to the 
same subject matter. Therefore subject matter in EP2 relating to plugs with 
triangle contacts has valid claim to priority of 6.6.01. But subject matter in EP2 
relating to plugs with square contacts is entitled only to the filing date of EP2, ie 
14.11.01. 
 
This means for: 
 
(i) square contact subject matter in EP1, which has effective date of 1.11.02, EP2 
is not prior art since the square contact subject matter in EP2 has an effective 
date of 14.11.01. In fact, EP1 is prior art for novelty only (under A 54(3) and (4) 
EPC) - not inventive step - against the square contact subject matter in EP2 as 
EP1 has an earlier effective date than EP2 but will be published after the filing 
date of EP2, in respect of the states that are designated in both applications and 
only if EP1 publishes as a regularly published application under A 93 EPC and 
the designation fees for EP1 are paid (R 23a EPC). 
 
EP1 is not due to be published until after 18 months from priority date, so 18 
months from 1.11.01, ie due to be published soon after 1.5.03. Designation fees 
are due (and examination fee and request for examination) within 6 months of 
publication of search report (and R 85a grace periods apply), which will either be 
published at same time as application or later. So PP need to make sure this is 
done in order that EP1 is A 54(3) EPC prior art against EP2 for square subject 
matter. 
 
(ii) for triangular subject matter in EP1, effective date is 8.11.02 (actual filing date) 
so EP2, which has then published, is full prior art for novelty and inventive step (A 
54(2) EPC) against this application.  →  ∆ subject matter of EP1 looks like it lacks 
novelty over EP2. 
 
(iii) for pentagon subject matter in EP1, effective date is 8.11.02, ie actual filing 
date. EP2 is full prior art as explained above. EP2 does not disclose plugs with 
pentagon contacts so EP2 does not give rise to lack of novelty of ⌂ subject matter 
of EP1. Issue is inventive step: Is a pentagon-shaped contact obvious in view of a 
triangular or square shaped contact, as disclosed in EP2. From client letter 
seems that pentagon shape is equivalent solution to triangle and square shape - 
so may be difficult to argue that this subject matter has an inventive step over 
EP2. 
 
Also be to checked, is there a US patent application publication? there should be 
as US1 and US2 were filed after the 29.11.00 date at which publication of US 
applications took effect. US1 was withdrawn so wouldn’t have published. US2 
would have published - but not sure if date is 18 M from filing date of US2 or 18 M 

- 7 - 


 
 

- 8 - 

from filing date of US1 which was basis for the IP - does not appear to affect 
situation with respect to EP1 or EP2 though. 
 
Also relevant to patent situation for EP1, EPC does not consider aesthetic 
creations as such to be patentable (A 52(2)(b) and (3) EPC). Shape of contact - 
aesthetic creation? Appears not as has technical effect, therefore at least the 
square contact subject matter of EP1 appears patentable. 
 
For pentagon-shaped contact, if changing shape from square (as disclosed in 
EP2) to pentagon only provides equivalent effect, then the issue of is this merely 
an aesthetic creation may also be relevant as the change in shape does not 
provide a technical effect, therefore pentagon subject matter may be 
unpatentable. 
 
On unity point, in absence of EP2 from consideration, the three embodiments 
have corresponding special technical features which are alternatives having the 
same technical effect and so are unified, C-III, 7.2, R 30(1) EPC. Further problem 
perhaps is presence of multiple independent claims to the plug with each type of 
contact shape in view of new R 29(2) EPC which sets out specific exclusions to 
general requirement that there may be only one claim type (ie product or process) 
in each European patent application. R 29(2)(c) EPC exclusion is that the claims 
are alternative solutions to a particular problem, where it is not appropriate to 
cover these alternatives by a single claim. That is the case here - the 3 shapes 
are alternative solutions to the problem of prolonging life of the HVHF plugs. So, 
feel could argue in theory for the presence of such independent claims in EP1 (if 
not then could file divisional applications at any time while patent still pending). 
However, due to EP2 making triangular contact shape subject matter lacking in 
novelty, at least that independent claim may have to be removed from EP1. 
 
Note that EP2 had mention of grant published on 6.11.02, so still in opposition 
period. Could file an opposition against EP2 up to 9 months from 6.11.02, ie up to 
6.8.03 (and pay fee). Presence of EP1 as A 54(3) novelty only citation could be 
used as ground of opposition, A 100(a) EPC against square-contact subject 
matter. 
 
May be worth requesting accelerated prosecution of EP1. 

 
2. 
Shielding systems

 
 
PP has  
ES1 

 
 
 
PCT1 

 
and 
 
EP4 

 
 
LBP has  
EP3 

 
 
EP3 has no priority claim. Publication of search report mentioned 24.9.02. 
Therefore, designation fees, due 6 M from 24.9.02, ie 24.3.03 (Monday). This fee 
is still payable with surcharge in the grace period of R 85a EPC. But check 
whether these have been paid, if not paid by end of grace period application will 
be deemed withdrawn (A 91(4) EPC). 


 

 
At least exam fee and request have been dealt with through (due also 6 M from 
publication of search report) as first examination report has already issued. PCT 1 
- although no action since search report published, this application is still pending. 
Seems that no Demand for international preliminary examination was filed in 
accordance with A 31 PCT) but since filing of Demand is no longer necessary to 
extend entry into national phase from 20/21 M to 30/31 M in all states, this 
application is still pending for all states except those that have notified the IB of 
the non-applicability of the new time limit under A 22(1) PCT, presently including 
Brazil, Singapore and others. However US and EPO have applied new A 22(1) 
PCT time limit. So, for all those countries that have applied the new time limit 30 
M period from priority date for entering national/regional phase for PCT 1 expires 
1.4.03 -  this is the case for the USA. 31 M period expires 1.5.03 - eg for EPO. 
So, if want protection in USA and Europe, enter national phase in US by 1.4.03 - 
need to file translation of Spanish application into English and pay national fee, 
file declaration of inventor, declaration of applicant’s entitlement to priority and 
preferably information disclosure statement by the expiry of 30 M deadline (ie 
1.4.03) Must at least pay national basic fee by this date but other requirements 
can be met later, if necessary on payment of various surcharges. 
 
Have a little more time for EPO entry (1.5.03). Need to pay national basic fee, pay 
designation fees, pay search fee, file request for examination and pay 
examination fee, and pay 3rd year renewal fee on this application by 31 M due 
date (R 107(1) EPC), grace periods available for these acts on payment of 
surcharges (R 108 EPC). Also required (R 107(1)(a) EPC) to file translation of the 
application, which is presently in Spanish, into one of the official EPO languages 
(FR, DE, EN). 
 
Since all states were designated and paid for in PCT 1, may wish to consider 
whether want to obtain protection for SI in other states (apart from those that 
have notified non-applicability of A 22(1) PCT). 
 
Once requirements for entry into European phase have been fulfilled (A 158 EPC, 
R 106 and R 107 EPC), PCI 1, which has an effective date of 1.10.00 since it 
appears to have validly claimed priority from ES1 (same applicant within 12 M 
from ES1 filing date, same subject matter - ie S1 shield) will be A 54(3) EPC prior 
art with respect to EP3 (ie novelty only prior art). This is because PCT 1 has an 
effective date prior to the effective date of EP3 (which does not have a claim to 
priority) but PCT 1 published (on 10.4.02) after the effective date of EP3. 
Therefore, to the extent that PCT 1 and EP3 designate the same states (A 54(4) 
EPC) and the designation fees for PCT 1 are paid, the subject matter of the 
claims of EP3 (SI type shielding system) lack novelty over the disclosure of PCT 
1 (which also discloses the SI type shielding system). 
 
EP4 
This is already European patent application, nothing appears to have happened 
since publication of search report (10.4.02). Check designation fees and exam 
request and exam fee was paid/filed by 10.10.02, or within R 85a or b EPC grace 
periods (for exam fee within 1 M from notification of the failure to observe the time 
limit and surcharge payable, R 85b EPC; for designation fees 1 M after 

- 9 - 


 
 

- 10 - 

notification under R 85a(1) if didn’t dispense with notification and within 2 M of 
missed date if did dispense with designation, R 85a(2) EPC). All these dates will 
likely have passed now (certainly R 85a(2) EPC deadline would have) and no 
further processing or restitutio possible on these time limits. So check paid - if not 
can’t do anything with EP4 now so claims to S2 would have been deemed 
withdrawn. If these fees etc. were paid then EP4 still pending and make sure pay 
3rd year renewal fee due 31.10.03 (can be paid up to 30.4.04 with additional fee, 
A 86(1) + (2) EPC). 
 
If EP4 still pending, can’t amend EP4 to put in claims to SI (which would have 
saved having to enter PCT 1 in European regional phase) even though have 
description of SI in EP4’s abstract as abstract may not be used for providing 
support for amendments (T 246/86). Consequently, such an amendment would 
not be allowable since it would add matter over the application as originally filed 
(contrary to A 123(2) EPC). Also, a priority document (ie here ESI) can not be 
used as basis for an amendment (also G 3/89 relevant). Therefore, if want to 
protect SI in Europe, will have to continue with PCT 1 (likewise, can’t amend PCT 
1 by including claims to S2 since disclosure of S2 in PCT 1 is only in abstract). If 
EP4 is still pending (and designation fees paid) then it is also relevant as novelty-
only prior art against EP3 to the extent that designate same states and that 
designation fees have been paid and because EP4 has an effective date earlier 
than but was published later than effective date of EP3. 
 
However, although EP4 discloses S1 in the abstract, even such a disclosure was 
enabling, since EP4 is relevant to EP3 for novelty only, content of abstract cannot 
be taken into consideration (since A 54(3) EPC refers to content of application as 
filed and neither prior document nor abstract, in view of A 85 EPC, form part of 
content of application). Abstract only forms part of prior art once published. 
Therefore, EP4 would not affect novelty of subject matter claimed in EP3. 
 
ES1 - Spanish right now granted. So, PP can stop anyone making, using etc. 
both S1 and S2 type shields in Spain.  
 
ES1 is relevant to EP3 as a prior national right - could lead to revocation of EP3 if 
granted, with respect to Spain. (Check when published though - assuming not 
published by 15.3.01 filing date of EP3 - if did then ES1 would be full prior art). 
But as prior national right, ES1 can’t affect EP3 until after grant as is not 
considered comprised in the state of the art for EP3. Also, can’t oppose EP3, if 
granted, before EPO in view of ES1 itself as prior national right is not a ground of 
opposition. 
 

3. 
Negotiation position 

 
 

 
PP’s position 
- 
PP has granted US2 in US, so can prevent LBP from using, selling, 
making etc. (and any other acts constituting infringement under US law) 
plugs with triangular or square-shaped contacts in the US, which is a 
relevant market for LBP. → ie bargaining point for PP. (Patents are 
negative rights). 

 


 

- 
PP has EP1 pending; plug with square contact looks patentable and when 
granted could prevent LBP using, selling, making etc. in any EPC state for 
which designation fees are paid for, such plugs. Position with regard to 
pentagon-shaped plugs is questionable - would need to show are 
inventive; but presently still pending. Once published EP1 will provide 
provisional protection (A 67 EPC), which can only be enforced after grant. 
Maybe good idea to request early publication by EPO so that provisional 
protection begins as soon as possible - need to file translations of claims in 
those states requiring it. 

 

- 
PP is currently prevented from using etc. plugs with triangle or square 
cross-section in Germany, ES, FR and GB by EP2 (patents are negative 
rights). Even though consider square x-section subject matter invalid is 
presently still in force → threat of filing opposition against this patent to get 
this patent revoked centrally, at least with respect to the square contact 
subject matter. 

 

- 
PP has ES1 which can stop LBP operating in Spain with respect to S1 and 
S2 type shields. 

 

- 
PP has PCT 1 pending, which could, if granted, prevent LBP operating 
with SI shield in any state in respect of which this is granted - possibly will 
be EPC states and USA. 

 

- 
PP has EP4 pending (I think) which would prevent LBP exploiting S2 if 
granted. 

 

So, PP is in strong position as can, or may be able in the future, to prevent LBP 
doing a number of things, especially in relation to the shielding systems. LBP may 
not be so bothered about PP being able to stop some of their activities with the 
plugs as they can freely use the ∆ contacts everywhere except US. 
 
Looks possible to suggest cross-licensing so that LBP can use shields S1 + S2 
and the ∆ and □ shaped contracts in US and □ shaped contact plugs in EPC 
states where hopefully EP1 will eventually grant. In return, PP will want to be able 
to use ∆ shaped plugs. 
 

4. 
If negotiation not successful, 

 

- 
oppose EP2, pay fee by 6. 8.03 using attacks described above in view of 
EP1 as A 54(3) EPC prior art for □ contact subject matter. 

 

- 
File A 115 EPC 3rd party observations against EP3, which is pending, in 
view of PCT 1. 

 
 
Make sure enter PCT 1 in national phase and check fee payments on EP4. 

 

Amend EP1 by removing ∆ subject matter, (divisional to pentagonal maybe) and 
file request for accelerated prosecution. Certainly request early publication of 
EP1. 

- 11 - 


