2004/DII/e

EUROPEAN QUALIFYING EXAMINATION 2004 

PAPER D  -  PART II 

This paper comprises: 

* 
Client’s letter followed by two (2) questions 
2004/DII/e/1 - 4  

* 
Annex : Calendars for 2003 and 2004 with 
2004/DII/e/5 - 6 

 
indication of the days on which at least one 

 
of the EPO filing offices is not open for the 

 
receipt of documents 

45% of the marks available for paper D are awarded for part I, 

55% for part II.


- 1 - 

2004/DII/e/1
.../...

Your client is Electra Optic, a Finnish company making optical and electronic devices 

such as cameras. They write to you as follows: 

“We have just acquired a small company, Oedipus Electric (which shall continue to exist 

as a separate legal entity), a Greek company which has developed image enhancement 

software for digital cameras. We found that on 30th April 2003 Oedipus Electric filed as a 

first filing a European patent application Oedipus-EP describing and claiming a method 

of image enhancement using this software and a digital camera having the software 

stored on it. The inventor, Miss Myopia, remains with Oedipus Electric and is keen to 

develop this technology further.

Their software is in fact identical to software invented by Dr. Panopticon (our employee) 

in 1997 (the “basic software”). At that time we filed a Finnish patent application Electra-

FI. Electra-FI describes and claims not only the basic software but also a particularly 

effective circuit for performing the basic software. This circuit is not obvious from the 

basic software and is not disclosed in Oedipus-EP. In 1997 we filed a European patent 

application Electra-EP claiming priority from Electra-FI. In Electra-EP we additionally 

describe and claim some further novel and inventive improvements to the basic software 

that in fact Oedipus Electric have not thought of (the “improved software”). The size and 

cost of the electronics made use of the invention possible only on a desk top computer 

and this was the only embodiment disclosed in Electra-FI and Electra-EP.

In the absence of a market we withdrew both Electra-FI and Electra-EP before 

publication. Our intention was to keep the idea secret until the economics were 

favourable.  We are sure that Miss Myopia developed the basic software independently 

of Dr. Panopticon. They agree on this and intend to publish a joint paper discussing the 

history of the software after Oedipus-EP is published. 


- 2 - 

2004/DII/e/2
.../...

Modern electronics make it feasible to incorporate the basic software, the circuit, and the 

improved software in a pocket digital camera. 

At a public conference last month Oedipus Electric disclosed in writing the basic 

software and the use of the basic software in a camera. Oedipus Electric has received 

many enquiries since then. We are very excited by this and wish to obtain patents for the 

basic software, the circuit, the improved software, and anything else you think inventive 

relating to digital cameras.

We have an assignment document signed by Oedipus Electric transferring Oedipus-EP 

to us. We ask that you record the transfer at the European Patent Office, and protect our 

inventions in USA, Europe, Japan, South Korea, Taiwan and the Czech Republic. The 

Czech Republic is important to us, since that is where our main competitor Zeus 

Cameras is situated and has its only factory. 

We are convinced that these technologies are important and we would like to ensure the 

maximum duration of protection for each invention. 

Please advise whether valid patent protection is obtainable for our inventions, and 

as to what applications and actions are necessary for us to get such protection in 

the name of Electra Optic ensuring the maximum duration of protection. 


- 3 - 

2004/DII/e/3
.../...

Zeus Cameras is being difficult with us in a different matter. Our subsidiary, Leda 

Optical, based in Slovakia, developed a new and inventive chip for digital cameras. Leda 

Optical first filed a European patent application Leda-EP in December 2001 after 

intensive prior art searching. Leda-EP describes and claims the chip. Leda Optical filed 

a PCT application, Leda-PCT, in December 2002 designating Europe, Japan and USA. 

Leda-PCT has an identical description and claims to, and validly claims priority from, 

Leda-EP. Leda-EP has been withdrawn. 

Leda made their first sales of their chips in April 2002, to Klondyke Kompakt Kameras in 

the USA which used them in a camera sold only in America. No sales by Leda Optical 

have been made since, but Klondyke intended to use the chip in their next generation of 

digital cameras, and Leda Optical expected an order in the next few months.  However, 

Klondyke has now written to Leda Optical about a letter they have received from Zeus, 

complaining that Klondyke’s digital cameras incorporating Leda Optical´s chip infringe 

their patent Zeus-EP and threatening Klondyke with infringement action if they sell into 

Europe. Zeus has also asked Klondyke to reveal the source of the chips. Zeus made it 

clear in their letter that they do not have a US application corresponding to Zeus-EP. 

Klondyke have asked why they should not buy the chips from Zeus rather than from 

Leda Optical. 

Zeus-EP designates all EPC states and was filed November 2001, published May 2002, 

granted January 2004 with claims as filed, and has claims infringed by Leda’s chip. The 

chips described in Zeus-EP and Leda-PCT are identical. 


- 4 - 

2004/DII/e/4

Zeus-EP validly claims priority of, and is identical in content to, a Czech application 

Zeus-CZ, which was filed in November 2000. A search has shown that Zeus-EP has no 

equivalent applications or patents other than Zeus-CZ. We have asked our Czech 

associate to check whether Zeus-CZ is in force. 

It is important that we have freedom to use Leda Optical’s chip worldwide, since if we 

get Klondyke’s order the sales volume will be huge. In addition, we have found that 

when Leda Optical’s chip is modified to incorporate our image enhancement circuit, a 

major improvement in performance is achieved.

Please advise as to the status of Leda-PCT, whether we are free to use Leda 

Optical´s chip, what Zeus can do about the chips that have already been sold, and 

what answer we should give to Klondyke.” 

Answer your client’s questions and advise how the client can improve their 

position.


- 1 - 

2004/DII/e/5
.../...

Annex 1 


- 2 - 

2004/DII/e/6

Annex 2 


