2005/DI/e 
 

EUROPEAN QUALIFYING EXAMINATION 2005 

 

PAPER D  -  PART I 

 

This paper comprises: 

 

* 
Questions 1 - 11 
2005/DI/e/1 - 6 

 
- Question 1 : 
2 points 

 
- Question 2 : 
7 points 

 
- Question 3 : 
4 points 

 
- Question 4 : 
4 points 

 
- Question 5 : 
5 points 

 
- Question 6 : 
3 points 

 
- Question 7 : 
3 points 

 
- Question 8 : 
5 points 

 
- Question 9 : 
2 points 

 
- Question 10 : 
6 points 

 
- Question 11 : 
4 points 

 

TOTAL: 45 POINTS 

 

* 
Annex: calendars for 2004 and 2005 with 
2005/DI/e/7 - 8 

 
indication of the days on which at least one 

 
of the EPO filing offices is not open for the 

 
receipt of documents 

 

45% of the marks available for paper D are awarded for part I, 

55% for part II.


- 1 - 
 

2005/DI/e/1 
.../...
 

Question 1 
(2 points)  

 

An international application PCT1 was filed with the EPO on 31 July 1998, and published on 02 

February 2000. International preliminary examination took place before the EPO, and the 

International Preliminary Examination Report was completed on 12 December 2000. Since the 

Report was very unfavourable, the applicant decided not to enter the European phase. 

Consequently, none of the acts listed in Rule 107(1) EPC were performed.  

 

Will the EPO allow third parties access to the file of the international preliminary examination 

of PCT1?  

 

 

 

Question 2 
(7 points)  

 

Will the EPO accept the following amendments: 

 

a) 
Together with a letter of reply to the examiner's first communication during substantive 

examination, the applicant introduced new claims complying with Article 123(2) EPC 

and relating to unsearched subject-matter which does not combine with the originally 

claimed invention to form a single general inventive concept. 

 

b) 
In opposition proceedings, the patentee replaced the granted claims, which were 

directed to originally disclosed "Substance A" and "Mixture B containing substance A", 

by amended claims directed to the "Use of substance A in mixture B" for a certain 

originally disclosed purpose. 

 

c) 
In appeal proceedings, an amended set of claims was transmitted, using the epoline® 

online filing software. 


- 2 - 
 

2005/DI/e/2 
.../...
 

d) 
In reply to the examiner's first communication during substantive examination, the only 

independent claim was delimited by introducing a disclaimer to establish novelty against 

a document which is state of the art according to Article 54(3) EPC. Neither the 

disclaimer nor the subject-matter excluded by it from the scope of the claim had a basis 

in the application as filed. 

 

e) 
In opposition proceedings, the patentee deleted from the only independent claim a 

feature which had been added during substantive examination, had no basis in the 

application as filed, and was without any technical meaning. 

 

 

Question 3 
(4 points)  

 

Mr. and Mrs. A and their adult son, all from London, filed together one notice of opposition to 

a European patent. The notice was signed by all three family members. Only one opposition 

fee was paid. All other requirements of Art. 99 and Rules 1, 55 and 56 EPC were met. 

 

a) Is the opposition validly filed? 

 

b) Discuss the situation if any one of the family members wishes to withdraw from the 

opposition proceedings and explain what needs to be done. 


- 3 - 
 

2005/DI/e/3 
.../...
 

Question 4 
(4 points)  

 

Applicant A timely requested the USPTO acting as Receiving Office to prepare and transmit 

the priority document to the International Bureau by crossing the relevant box in the PCT 

request form and paying the prescribed fee. Upon entry into the European phase, the priority 

document has been furnished neither to the International Bureau nor to the EPO. What are the 

consequences for substantive examination? 

 

 

Question 5  
(5 points)  

 

You filed at the European Patent Office on 07.05.2004 an international application claiming a 

priority of 08.05.2003. The EPO acting as International Searching Authority established an 

International Search Report and a Written Opinion and transmitted a copy of both documents 

to you on 09.10.2004. The Written Opinion is negative on some aspects. 

 

What actions at least do you have to perform, and by when, in order to have the Written 

Opinion re-examined during the international phase?  

 

Question 6 
(3 points)  

 

Austrian Company A develops alarm systems for cars. The "Goldilock" alarm system was 

jointly developed with German car company B. It was agreed to file a European patent 

application naming A as applicant for Austria and B as applicant for the other states. The patent 

granted on the basis of said application is validly opposed by B's competitor C on the grounds 

of Article 100 (a) EPC. A wants to limit the subject-matter of claim 1 with respect to the cited 

prior art, B refuses this. Can A and B separately pursue different sets of claims in the opposition 

proceedings? 


- 4 - 
 

2005/DI/e/4 
.../...
 

Question 7 
(3 points)  

 

In reply to a communication pursuant to Rule 51(4) EPC, Applicant A of European patent 

application B duly filed the outstanding translations of the 10 claims and paid a sum of EUR 730 

to cover the fees for grant and printing. The application documents to be printed comprise 36 

pages. 

 

Applicant A asks you whether the sum paid was correct and whether, in the event that the sum 

paid was too large, the excess will be automatically refunded to him. 

 

 

Question 8 
(5 points)  

 
Your client is patent proprietor in an appeal procedure against a decision of an opposition 

division to reject the opposition of the sole opponent O. The opponent has filed a new relevant 

prior art document D1 together with the statement setting out the grounds for appeal. Your 

client thinks that document D1 prejudices the maintenance of the patent and intends to restrict 

the patent to make sure that his patent is valid. Therefore, you have filed a restricted set of 

claims in due time before the oral proceedings before the Board of Appeal. The 

opponent/appellant has lost interest in this case and has withdrawn his opposition immediately 

before the oral proceedings.  

 
Can your client restrict the patent? 


- 5 - 
 

2005/DI/e/5 
.../...
 

Question 9 
(2 points)  
 

On request of a national court trying a revocation action relating to a European patent, will the 

European Patent Office give a technical opinion on whether the European patent which is the 

subject of the action is valid?  

 

 

Question 10 
(6 points)  

 

European patent application EP-IT was duly filed by Italian company ITSA in Italian language 

a few years ago. A translation of the application into the French language was filed in due time. 

 

Recently, ITSA was taken over by US company USCO. It has not been decided if the 

application will be transferred to USCO or be kept by ITSA, but in any case USCO are keen on 

using the English language during further prosecution of EP-IT before the EPO. USCO ask you, 

as their European patent attorney, the following questions:  

 

a) Can the English language be used by you and/or the EPO in the written procedure 

during substantive examination of EP-IT? 

b) Can the English language be used by you and/or the examining division in oral 

proceedings taking place during substantive examination of EP-IT? 

c) Which languages can be used by either USCO or ITSA for filing a divisional application 

based on EP-IT?  

d) In case of observations by third parties concerning the patentability of the invention of 

EP-IT, in which language has their statement of grounds to be presented?


- 6 - 
 

2005/DI/e/6 
 

Question 11 
(4 points)  

 

You have received on 16 November 2004 a communication C1 pursuant to Rule 51(4) EPC 

dated 15 November 2004, in which you were given a period of four months to pay the fees for 

grant and printing and to file a translation of the claims in the two official languages of the 

European Patent Office other than the language of the proceedings of your European patent 

application EP1. Together with the communication C1, you were invited to file a translation of 

the priority document for EP1. The text of EP1 differs from that of its priority document. On 

01 March 2005, you have validly paid the grant and printing fee and filed the translations of the 

claims of EP1. On 08 March 2005, you are informed by your translation service that the 

translation of the priority document will be ready only in the week after 28 March 2005. You 

know from experience that no other translation service can provide such a translation more 

quickly. 

 

Give two ways of saving the priority claim of EP1 without applying for restitutio in integrum. 


- 7 - 
 

2005/DI/e/7 
…/…
 

 
Annex 1 


- 2 - 
 

2005/DI/e/8 
 

 
Annex 2 

 


