 

 
2006/DII/e 

EUROPEAN QUALIFYING EXAMINATION 2006 

 

PAPER D  -  PART II 

 

 

 

This paper comprises: 

 

 

* 
Client’s letter followed by five (5) questions 
2006/DII/e/1 - 5 

 
 

 
 

* 
Annex: Calendars for 2005 and 2006 with 
2006/DII/e/6 - 7 

 
indication of the days on which at least one 

 
of the EPO filing offices is not open for the 

 
receipt of documents 

 

 

 

 

 

40% of the marks available for paper D are awarded for part I, 

60% for part II.


 
- 1 - 

2006/DII/e/1 
…/… 

 

 

Good NV 

 

 

 
March 2006  

 

 

 

Dear representative,  

 

I wish to seek your advice on a number of issues which are set out below.  

 

We are a Dutch company active in the field of building materials and have laboratories 

and manufacturing sites at various places in Europe. We manufacture and sell thermal 

solar panels.  

 

Our panels are made of two superposed parallel sheets of plastic material held at a 

distance from each other by means of numerous straight parallel walls. The walls are 

perpendicular to the sheets and define ducts between the latter. At either end of the 

panel these ducts communicate with two transverse ducts: one for feeding the panel 

with water, the other for evacuating it. Solar rays heat the water passing through the 

panel. Such panels are well known. 

 

We found that replacing the usual straight walls with undulating (i.e. wavy) ones 

increased the thermal efficiency of the panel. We filed a national patent application F1 in 

France on 1 October 2003, claiming solar panels with undulating walls and mentioning, 

as an example, a test panel one metre long with walls having seventeen undulations per 

metre. We also described and claimed an extrusion process by which the panel is 

produced by extruding molten plastic material with a vibrating extrusion nozzle.


 
- 2 - 

2006/DII/e/2 
…/… 

 

 

We then found that with respect to the walls the number of undulations was highly 

significant. In our German laboratory we surprisingly found that, in order to obtain better 

results, the number of undulations had to be between five and sixteen undulations per 

metre length. We filed an application for a German utility model, D1, on 15 March 2004. 

It described and claimed panels having undulating walls and the improved range of five 

to sixteen undulations per metre. The embodiments described were all test panels one 

metre long. The claims were not limited to any size of panel. D1 was made publicly 

available on 15 September 2004. 

  

Shortly after filing D1 we realised that we had limited ourselves too much. According to 

our Italian laboratory, said better results were obtained with walls having up to thirty 

undulations per metre. What really matters is the size of the panel: the number chosen 

should be up to sixteen for smaller sizes, i.e. for panels under three metres long, and 

between fifteen and thirty for larger sizes, i.e. for panels over three metres long. We filed 

a third application IT1 on 22 September 2004 describing these different ranges and 

having claims covering both the range from five to sixteen undulations per metre for 

smaller panels, and the range from fifteen to thirty undulations per metre for larger 

panels. We included examples clearly demonstrating this technical improvement over 

both claimed ranges for all integer values of undulations per metre.


 
- 3 - 

2006/DII/e/3 
…/… 

 

 

We filed an international application, PCT1, on 1 October 2004 claiming the three 

priorities and containing all the information disclosed in the priority applications. All the 

inventors are our employees and have signed appropriate assignments for the PCT 

application and the relevant priorities. PCT1 has the following claims:  

claim 1 directed to solar panels having undulating walls,  

claim 2 to solar panels having undulating walls with 5-16 undulations/metre,  

claim 3 to solar panels having undulating walls with 5-16 undulations/metre and  

<3m length,   

claim 4 to solar panels having undulating walls with 15-30 undulations/metre and  

>3m length,  

claim 5 directed to the extrusion process. 

 

The only document dealing with this type of solar panel that we know is an article that 

we found in "The Proceedings of the 2002 Tokyo Symposium on Solar Panels". The 

symposium was held in 2002, but the proceedings of the symposium were not published 

until May 2004. The article mentions the use of undulating walls to mechanically 

strengthen the panels. It mentions only one example, a panel one metre long with walls 

having twenty undulations per metre. No other disclosure appears to have been made.


 
- 4 - 

2006/DII/e/4 
…/… 

 

 

Thus everything was in order until we discovered the publication of a European patent 

application EPB that was filed shortly after D1 in April 2004. It claims a new structure for 

the superposed parallel sheets of a solar panel. However, it describes two examples of 

solar panels, with undulating walls. The two examples have ten and twenty undulations 

per metre respectively, the first being two metres long and the second four metres long. 

No explanation is given for the undulations. It appears that EPB was filed by our 

competitor, Mr Bad. I am of the opinion that he received the information from our 

research manager, Mr Ugly, himself. Mr Ugly left our company suddenly two years ago. 

I conducted some investigations and learned that Mr Bad presented a panel having 

walls with undulations at a trade fair on the Costa del Sol in Spain in October 2005. He 

is offering panels of all sizes. We have located no other disclosure of Mr Bad’s panels or 

any applications equivalent to EPB elsewhere. We entered the EP phase of PCT1 

immediately (Euro-PCT1), in November 2005, and designated DE, FR and IT to cover 

our market.  

 

At a meeting recently, I took the opportunity to tell Mr Bad what I thought of his 

behaviour. He admitted nothing, suggesting that it will be difficult for us to prove 

anything. He said he was willing to maintain our good relations and was ready to 

withdraw the conflicting embodiments in application EPB for the three countries 

(DE, FR and IT) that were designated in our application. 

 

I am not sure whether to accept this offer, as we envisage good sales throughout 

Europe. I should now like to cover other European countries, particularly as Mr Bad has 

now launched two types of panel with undulating walls (one with ten undulations per 

metre, the other with twenty undulations per metre) in the United Kingdom and Belgium.


 
- 5 - 

2006/DII/e/5 
 

 

 

We are still working on the launch of our product and know that it will soon be time to 

enter the national phases for PCT1 in other countries outside Europe. As we have 

interested investors, but do not expect decisions before June, I would not like to pay the 

patent costs for nothing if the decisions prove negative.  

 

 

Are each of claims 1 to 5 valid in Euro-PCT1, and if not, can we improve them? 

 

Can we extend our Euro-PCT1 to cover the United Kingdom and Belgium? 

 

Is there an easy way to postpone national phase entry for PCT1 outside Europe 

without paying surcharges? 

 

Can we stop Mr Bad from marketing his panels? 

 

Can Mr Bad stop us from marketing our panels?  


- 1 - 
 

2006/DII/e/6 
.../... 

 

 
Annex 1 

 

 


- 2 - 
 

2006/DII/e/7 
 

 

 
Annex 2 

 

 


